Discovering Transition Pathways Towards Coviability
with Machine Learning
Laure Berti-Equille1, Rafael L. G. Raimundo2
1IRD, ESPACE-DEV
500, rue Jean-Franc ¸ois Breton
34093 Montpellier cedex 03, FRance
laure.berti@ird.fr
2Federal University of Para ´ıba - Campus IV
Dept. of Engineering and Environment, Centre for Applied Science and Education
Av. Santa Isabel s/n, Rio Tinto, PB, Brasil
rafael.raimundo@academico.ufpb.br
Abstract
Coviability refers to the multiple socio-ecological arrange-
ments and governance structures under which humans and
nature can coexist in functional, fair, and persistent ways.
Transitioning to a coviable state in environmentally degraded
and socially vulnerable territories is challenging. This paper
present an ongoing French-Brazilian joint research project
combining machine learning, agroecology, and social sci-
ences to discover coviability pathways that can be adopted
and implemented by local populations in the North-East re-
gion of Brazil.
Context
The long-standing debate on how human societies can en-
sure the equitable use of common natural resources, con-
serve biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, and promote
individual freedom and collective action (Ostr ¨om 2011) has
been developed into several schools of thought that deﬁne
sustainability in different ways depending on their relative
emphasis on ecological, socio-economic and political pro-
cesses (see Fisher et al. (2007) for a comprehensive review).
One of such schools is founded on the emerging concept-
paradigm of socio-ecological coviability , which refers to
the multiple ways by which we can achieve a functional and
persistent relationship between humans and non-humans un-
der speciﬁc regulations and constraints (Barrire et al., 2019).
This paper presents our ongoing French-Brazilian collab-
orative project initiated in 2021 which aims at: (1) Estab-
lishing a diagnosis of socio-ecological coviability for sev-
eral sites of interest in Nordeste , the North-East region of
Brazil (in the states of Para ´ıba, Cear ´a, Pernambuco, and Rio
Grande do Norte respectively known for their biodiversity
hotspots, droughts and vulnerabilities to climate change) us-
ing advanced data science techniques for multisource and
multimodal data fusion and (2) Finding transition path-
ways towards coviability equilibrium using machine learn-
ing techniques. Data collected in situ by scientists, ecolo-
gists, and local actors combined with volunteered informa-
tion, pictures from smart-phones, and data available on-line
Copyright c2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.from satellite imagery, social media, surveys, etc. can be
used to compute various coviability indicators of interest
for the local actors. These indicators are useful to character-
ize and monitor the socio-ecological coviability status along
various dimensions of anthropization, human welfare, eco-
logical and biodiversity balance, and ecosystem intactness
and vulnerabilities.
Among an inﬁnite space of possible transition strategies,
AI technologies and reinforcement learning (RL) in particu-
lar is applied to propose estimations and predictions of po-
tential coviability pathways (or trajectories) for transition-
ing from a diagnosis state to an ideal coviability target (or
intended view) deﬁned by the user of the technology. Us-
ing computational models, our project aims to predict alter-
native solutions for coviability transitions at different time
horizons and various spatial and temporal granularity levels.
It will also reﬂect on the past and expose what would have
happened had reality been different. The purpose of our re-
search results is to be used by the local actors to be better
informed and to improve the governance of territories fac-
ing environmental degradation and ecological vulnerability.
Our consortium is composed of ten institutions (57
permanent researchers) in France and Brazil, working in
interdisciplinary collaborations in environmental sciences
(agroecology, hydrology), informatics (data science, re-
mote sensing, geomatics, and machine learning) and so-
cial sciences (anthropology, social science, economics)
lead by the Federal University of Para `ıba in Brazil and
by IRD ESPACE-DEV research center in France. It in-
volves four Brazilian universities (Federal University of
Para`ıba (UFPB), Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
(UFRN), University of Sao Paulo (USP), Federal University
of Pernambuco), four IRD1research units (UMR ESPACE
DEV , IMBE, PALOC, UMMISCO) in France, FUNCEME
(Fundac ¸ao Cearense de Meteorologia e Recursos H ´ıdricos),
GBIF France and Brazil, and three collaborators: INCT On-
daCBC2and INCT Odisseia3, and CEMA VE/ICMBio4. Our
1https://en.ird.fr/
2https://www.ondacbc.com.br/?lang=en
3http://inct-odisseia.i3gs.org/
4https://www.icmbio.gov.br/cemave/joint research outcomes are intended to have deep societal,
scientiﬁc and economical impacts, and be used to guide
global conservation and restoration strategies toward the Na-
ture positive 2050 target (Locke et al., 2020).
Overview of our Approach
The lack of coviability indicators on Brazilian territories
often prevents local managers, farmers, and administrators
from correctly establishing a diagnosis, monitoring its evo-
lution, planning daily and seasonal activities of the natural
areas with considering carefully information about the life
cycle of ﬂora and fauna species living in the area (repro-
duction period, rarity, disturbance tolerance, bird migration
key zones, etc.) and the intactness of their habitats to bet-
ter preserve and restore the milieu. Without such indicators
at various spatial and temporal scales, adapting the gover-
nance and justifying some regulations of the territory is a
difﬁcult task for the local actors. Relevant sources of in-
formation are usually not or under-exploited; eco-tourists,
farmers, and populations are not informed of their impact on
nature and they may not understand and accept such regu-
lations. Global abrupt disconnection from nature is not an
option for the now and future generations, the optimal bal-
ance between anthropization, ecological welfare, and bio-
diversity wealth has to be found. We believe that practical
and operational solutions based on AI technologies can help
decision-making in this context and facilitate the necessary
transitions.
In our project, we revisit several fundamental problems in
agroecology using data science and machine learning under
the lens of coviability and its multiple dimensions. Several
work have already considered reinforcement learning ap-
plied to agroecology: e.g., for irrigation scheduling (Yang et
al., 2020), for optimizing fertilizer usage as well as enhanc-
ing the yield (e.g., CropGym environment (Overweg et al.,
2021)), or for watershed management (Mason et al., 2016)
and biological environment (Binas et al., 2019). However,
to the best of our knowledge, none has been proposed to de-
velop actionable research products for monitoring coviabil-
ity and discovering transition pathways towards coviability.
In what follows, we enumerate our project’s objectives in
addressing four scientiﬁc challenges and shortly present our
case studies with the application of ML techniques.
Challenge 1. Modeling coviability indicators from mul-
timodal, multisource, multiscale data fusion. As the vol-
ume and variety of socio-environmental data and digital re-
sources have dramatically grown in the last decade, it has
become crucial to: (1) Align, interconnect, integrate all rele-
vant silos of data at different spatial and temporal scales lo-
cal, regional, territorial) as illustrated in Fig. 1: from satellite
images, pictures from visitors, data collected through large-
scale citizen science platforms such as Pl@ntNet5(Go¨eau
et al., 2013), eBird6, iNaturalist7or MoveBank8; (2) Ana-
lyze and explore interrelationships across a variety of disci-
5https://plantnet.org
6https://ebird.org
7https://www.inaturalist.org
8https://www.movebank.orgplines; (3) Develop relevant indicators for assessing vulner-
ability in socio-ecological systems; and (4) Present the indi-
cators via dashboards and adequate visualization artifacts to
the actors, e.g., ad-hoc doughnut representations (Raworth,
2017). In this context, the integration of heterogeneous and
multimodal data, preparation, and featurization are challeng-
ing tasks.
Challenge 2. On-site identiﬁcation of plants, animals,
and complex scenes for computing coviability indica-
tors. The impacts of climate changes and human activ-
ities on biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and environ-
mental resources are numerous, complex, distributed differ-
ently according to temporal and spatial scales. The com-
plex and likely reciprocal causal relationships between hu-
mans and the environment must be understood according to
systemic, multi-scale, and transdisciplinary approaches inte-
grating and interconnecting a large variety of datasets from
ecology, remote sensing, local authorities, etc. Given the
data uncertainties and what we know about the ecosystem
of a site, the analysis of biodiversity remain challenging for
automatically identifying multiple plants and animal species
as well as decomposing the landscape elements precisely.
State-of-the-art techniques allowing to identify plants and
animals from individual pictures (e.g., Pl@ntNet or iNatu-
ralist applications) cannot be straightforwardly adapted to
our framework and need to be deeply revisited to capture
the complexity of our domain to compute local coviability
indicators with uncertainty quantiﬁcation at every data pro-
cessing step.
Challenge 3. Finding coviability pathways from the di-
agnostic to a target state. Understanding how to transition
from the current state of coviability to a state that reconciles
(i) biodiversity conservation and ecosystem functioning, (ii)
social welfare, and (iii) economic resilience is another major
scientiﬁc issue of our project. As shown in Fig. 1, depending
on the proﬁle of the actors (e.g., farmers, indigenous popu-
lations, administrators) as the main users of our technology,
the considered scale, the constraints associated to the terri-
tory (e.g., economic viability, presence of species close to
extinction), and a coviability target co-speciﬁed with the ac-
tors, an optimal trajectory need to be discovered to support
adequate governance schemes. Due to the inherent critical
nature of adopting coviability pathways, it is not foresee-
able to blindly provide a ranking of trajectories without tak-
ing into account the context and multiple alternative spatial,
temporal, and actor-dependent viewpoints. To keep the ex-
perts and local actors in the loop, we take into account their
feedback at every step: from the ﬂora/fauna scene identiﬁ-
cation/validation, the choice and composition of coviability
indicators, the design of dashboards and results of recom-
mendation, scoring, and explanation of discovered optimal
pathways. We revisit this challenge as an optimization prob-
lem and use causal reinforcement learning and various op-
timization methods. Choosing the deep RL architecture as
well as the design of relevant coviability indicators are parts
of our investigation. Another challenging problem relates to
the study of constrained trajectories (or pathways) to take
into account the context.DiagnosisCoviability
territorial scale    TargetIdeal
regional or departmental scale
Land cover/Land use datasets
Socio-economic datasets
Biological ﬂora and fauna datasets
Air/water/soil quality datasets
Climate change datasets
Base map datasets
Local governance datasets
Satellite images
Social media datalocal scale
regional or departmental scale
local scale
territorial scaleData Science & EngineeringArtiﬁcial Intelligence
Space of possible pathways for coviability
optimal pathwayPictures taken by smartphones on siteExisting  datasets Ad-hoc doughnut dashboards Co-speciﬁed target  by local actors Reinforcement LearningFigure 1: Overview of our Approach
Challenge 4. Transfer to the society and educational pro-
grams. Designing coviability indicators is not politically
and socially neutral. Therefore, it is important to involve
civil society in the process of data collection, annotation,
and technology validation via participatory science: farm-
ers, indigenous populations, and children of school age will
be involved in the analysis and interpretation of the data
and results (in terms of coviability indicators and transition
pathways) since these can often be considered as politico-
ecological. We have started to deﬁne educational programs
in collaboration with schools and universities for transfer-
ring the results of our 5-year project and started the devel-
opment of didactic tools intended for children, teenagers,
students (future citizens), teachers, and managers of natural
spaces. Pilot demonstrators will help in the ML technology
transfer to the society with the challenge to build trust and
engage the population.
ML Applications to Four Case Studies
Figure 1 illustrates our transversal research methodology
which we intend to apply and validate on four case stud-
ies summarized hereafter. 1) Para ´ıba Case Study. At the
Northern edge of the Atlantic Forest biome, our project
will consolidate the proposal of the Northern Atlantic For-
est Agroecological Corridor (NAFAC), bridging science
and governance to transform an environmentally degraded
and socially vulnerable landscape into a coviable multi-
scape (i.e., a landscape planned to be multifunctional), pro-
viding optimal solutions for conﬂicting demands between
eco-evolutionary and socioeconomic process at the regional
scale. In doing so, we expect to enhance the biological con-
nectivity of biodiversity hotspots and promote agroecologi-
cal transitions and social welfare in rural communities.Our Goals: (1) Co-construct, with local communities and
managers, sustainability diagnoses depicting the current
state of key environmental, social and economic indica-
tors, mapped to large socio-ecological datasets for classify
the diagnosis into a coviability scale; (2) Model alterna-
tive agroecological transition scenarios using deep RL at
the local scale, based on the goals deﬁned by each com-
munity involved in the NAFAC proposal; (3) Develop in-
teractive maps, dashboards, explainable classiﬁcation, and
social network tools at the regional scale to support partic-
ipatory decision-making on spatial strategies fostering eco-
logical and economic connectivity, biodiversity restoration
and sustainable production in the NAFAC region.
2) Cear ´a Case Study. The state of Cear ´a is the Brazil-
ian state with the largest ratio of area in the Polygon of
Droughts. It historically faces the climatic and social ef-
fects of drought as the semi-arid climate covers more than
90% of its territory. Because of the high intra-annual and
inter-annual variability of precipitation, the high evapora-
tion rates, the intermittent ﬂuvial regime and the limited un-
derground resources, Cear ´a often faces water scarcity. The
information system and water resources in Cear ´a are man-
aged at the state level. This context reveals the importance
of strengthening territorial water governance. The integrated
knowledge of territorial dynamics at the local level could
enable the construction of feasible pathways with multi-
objective optimization to optimize water distribution, reduce
energy and carbon footprint, and ensure sustainable develop-
ment.
Our Goals: (1) Carry out a diagnosis of territorial wa-
ter management and agriculture by extracting and merging
available data to build a knowledge base; (2) Provide the
territorial management systems with tools to integrate andprocess local data and support regression-based predictions
for greater efﬁciency of local water governance and agroe-
cological practices; (3) Provide counter-factual analyses of
the prediction results with local what-if scenarios.
3) Rio Grande do Norte Case Study. The Caatinga is
the only exclusively Brazilian biome, which is highly threat-
ened by anthropogenic activities. The increasing deforesta-
tion rates across the Caatinga are triggering desertiﬁcation.
Developing strategies to boost the restoration of Caatinga’s
biodiversity and related ecosystem functions, while promot-
ing the socio-productive inclusion of human populations
facing social vulnerability, is the key to promoting socio-
ecological coviability. This case study beneﬁts from data,
expertise, and insights from vegetation restoration experi-
ments performed by UFRN Laboratory of Restoration Ecol-
ogy at the Ac ¸u National Forest since 2016, which have re-
ceived wide international recognition9. Our project will co-
fund the Centre of Reference for the Caatinga Restoration
(CIRCA) in the Ac ¸u region. It intends to become a ref-
erence for biodiversity-based value chains that are depen-
dent on restoration models and supported by local cooper-
ative initiatives. CIRCA structure is already partially im-
plemented and we expect to implement a pilot-project in-
volving women facing social vulnerability in the develop-
ment of biodiversity-based products. Although the products
to be produced will be decided in partnership with the local
women, the restoration plots have shown potential to pro-
duce honey, cosmetic inputs, and medicinal plants. We will
contribute to the planned observatory of coviability transi-
tions by providing niche models of potential distributions of
600 native plant species that are suitable for use in ecological
restoration associated to socio-productive inclusion projects
under future climate scenarios.
Our Goals: (1) Identify, in partnership with local women,
socioeconomically viable biodiversity-based products; (2)
Use ML, existing niche models, population projections, and
domestic and international market trade information to pre-
dict the short-term and future viability of biodiversity-based
value chains; (3) Provide predictions for the geographic vari-
ation of ideal plant assemblages ecologically suitable for the
restoration of Caatinga biome under current and future cli-
mate conditions that will optimize locally the balance be-
tween functional diversity of plants and their bioeconomic
potential.
4) Pernambuco Case Study. In several regions across
the Northeast of Brazil, the ancient indigenous tradition of
eating the queens (ic ¸ ´as) of leaf-cutting ants (Atta spp.) re-
mained a relevant dietary item for human populations. Leaf-
cutting ants are widely known as critical agricultural pests,
imposing severe economic losses to farmers. Because of the
growing use of pesticides in Brazil, the persistence of the
traditional ic ¸ ´as consumption is highly threatened. Neverthe-
less, the extent to which the consumption of Atta queens
by humans can act as a biological control mechanism, mit-
igating their negative effects on agriculture, remains largely
unknown. This case study will investigate the use of leaf-
cutting ants as food sources by human populations and how
9https://ufrn.br/en/press/headlines/38360/esperanca-na-caatingaa coviability approach can simultaneously mitigate the ants
effects on agriculture while maintaining the traditional con-
sumption of these insects.
Our Goals: (1) Understand the socio-cultural processes that
have maintained the traditional consumption of Atta ants
alive in the Catimbau region, while this is a declining prac-
tice in Brazil; (2) Use deep RL and simulation to plan vege-
tation restoration plots surrounding agricultural ﬁelds to pro-
vide alternative resources for Atta ants and sustain alterna-
tive biodiversity-based ecosystem services and economical
alternatives to local farmers; (3) Map the geographic dis-
tribution of edible insects and other species used as food
sources, contributing to the identiﬁcation of potential links
between ecosystem restoration and traditional knowledge
and practices.
Conclusion
Understanding and predicting fundamental relationships be-
tween socio-economic processes shaping ecological vulner-
ability and its implications for ecosystem functioning at
various spatiotemporal scales is a key universal challenge
we shall face in the years to come in order to develop
viability strategies that effectively reconcile nature, soci-
eties, and economies. A ﬁrst step is to unravel fundamen-
tal socio-ecological processes shaping tensions and antago-
nisms among social, economic and ecological entities at dif-
ferent temporal and spatial scales. Our project aims at help-
ing draw up coviability diagnoses of a territory by integrat-
ing and exploiting various multimodal datasets, predicting
coviability scores using ML, and ﬁnding socio-ecological
transition pathways using RL. Our research is applied to four
case studies across the North-East region of Brazil and is in-
tended to provide actionable ML-based solutions for covia-
bility monitoring and prediction. It combines humanities and
social sciences, agroecology, and data and ML science.
References
Barri `ere, O. et al. 2019. Coviability of social and ecological sys-
tems: reconnecting mankind to the biosphere in an era of global
change. Springer.
Berti-Equille, L., Dao, D., Ermon, S., Goswami, B. 2021. Chal-
lenges in KDD and ML for Sustainable Development. Tutorial in
the ACM Intl. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
KDD 2021, Sinpapore .
Davidson, S., et al. 2020. Ecological Insights from Three Decades
of Animal Movement Tracking Across a Changing Arctic. Science ,
370(6517): 712–715.
Fischer, J., et al. 2007. Mind the Sustainability Gap. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution , 22: 621–624.
Go¨eau, H., et al. 2013. Pl@ntNet Mobile App. In Proc. of the 21st
ACM Intl. Conf. on Multimedia, MM’13 , 423-424.
Locke, H. e. a. 2020. A Nature-Positive World: The Global Goal
for Nature. Nature Positive .
Ostr¨om, E. 2011. Background on the Institutional Analysis and
Development Framework. Policy Studies Journal , 39: 7–27.
Raworth, K. 2017. Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think Like
a 21st-Century Economist . Random House.
von Magius Møgelhøj, H. 2021. Overtourism: The Role of Effective
Destination Management . Business Expert Press.