 
 Using Natural Language Processing fo r Automating the Id entification of 
Climate Action Interlin kages within the Sustai nable Development Goals 
Xin Zhou1, Kshitij Jain2, Mustafa Moinuddin1, Patrick McSharry3,4,5 
1Institute for Global Environmental Strategies, 2108-11 Kamiyamaguchi, Hayama, Kanagawa, 240-0115 Japan; 2Google Inc.; 
3Carnegie Mellon University Africa, Kigali, Rwanda; 4African Centre of Excellence in Data Science, University of Rwanda, 
Kigali, Rwanda; 5Oxford Man Institute of Quantitative Finance, Oxford University, Oxford, UK. 
zhou@iges.or.jp, kshitijj@google.com, moinuddin@iges.or.jp, patrick@mcsharry.net 
 
 
Abstract 
Climate action, Goal 13 of the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG), cuts across almost all SDGs. Achieving climate 
goals can reinforce the achievements in many other goals, but 
at the same time climate mitigation and adaptation measures 
may generate trade-offs, such as levelling  the cost of energy 
and transitioning away from fossil fuels. Leveraging the synergies and minimizing the trade-offs among the climate goals and other SDGs is an imperative task for ensuring policy coherence. Understanding the interlinkages between climate action and other SDGs can help inform about the synergies and trade-offs. This paper presents a novel 
methodology by using natural language processing (NLP) to 
automate the process of systematically identifying the key 
interlinkages between climate action and SDGs from a large 
amount of climate liter ature. A qualitative SDG interlinkages 
model for climate action was automatically generated and 
visualized in a network graph. This work contributes to the 
conference thematic topic on using AI for policy alignment for climate change goals, SDGs and associated environmental, social and governance (ESG) frameworks. 
Introduction  
The UN 2030 Agenda charts out 17 interlinked Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) that require a holistic approach 
to their implementation. However, such a holistic approach 
is new and challenging due to the broad coverage of social, 
economic and environmental dimensions and complicated 
relations among 169 targets. This is particularly true for 
SDG 13 (climate action) which links with all major sectors 
including energy, industry, transport and agriculture, and 
poses severe challenges to human and animal life, the 
planet’s water, marine and terrestrial ecosystems and 
biodiversity. Achieving climate goals can reinforce the 
achievements in many other goals, but at the same time 
climate actions may generate trade-offs, such as levelling 
the cost of energy and transitioning away from fossil fuels. 
                                                 
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. Leveraging the synergies and minimizing the trade-offs 
among climate goals and other SDGs is an imperative task 
for ensuring policy coherence. Understanding the 
interlinkages of climate action within the SDGs can help 
inform about the synergies and trade-offs. 
There is a gap in the scientific knowledge about how the 
SDGs are interlinked, making it difficult to know whether 
targets are mutually reinforcing or competing with one 
another. This knowledge gap inhibits the adoption of an 
integrated approach. There are emerging attempts to 
understand SDG interlinkages (e.g., Allen, Metternicht, and 
Wiedmann 2018; ICSU 2017; Le Blanc 2015; Miola, 
Borchardt, and Neher 2019; Nilsson, Griggs, and Visback 
2016; Zhou and Moinuddin 2017; Zhou, Moinuddin, and Li 
2021). These attempts took different approaches, such as 
expert opinion (e.g., ICSU 2017), literature review (e.g., 
Zhou et al. 2022) and statistical analysis (e.g., Dörg ő, 
Sebestyén, and Abonyi 2018). Among these attempts, the 
Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES) 
developed the SDG Interlinkages Analysis & Visualisation 
Tool (https://sdginterlinkages.iges.jp/) to identify, quantify 
and visualise the SDG interlinkages (Zhou, Moinuddin, and 
Li 2021). The IGES method uses a literature review to 
identify the causal relations based on scientific evidence.  
The tool covering 27 countries from Asia and Africa has 
been used to assist policy making on SDG priority setting, 
institutional arrangement and sectoral policy development 
in countries such as Indonesia, Bangladesh and Viet Nam. 
However, the lack of well-defined evidence on the 
causations between SDG targets poses a major challenge for 
the application of the IGES tool. The tool's current literature 
review is conducted manually based on a limited amount of 
literature, making it difficult to systematically capture the 
full range of SDG interactions. For example, a keyword-
based search on “climate change” in titles from Scopus 
  
 found more than 85,000 relevant references. Such a large 
amoung of literature data makes a compelling case for a 
systematic approach to literature review. A manual 
approach is also laborious, potentially subjective based on 
the judgement of different subject experts and difficult to 
scale to the full set of SDGs. A recent study extended the 
IGES model at the river basin scale by exploring the causal 
relations through a systematic review using software-based 
text analysis and human intervention (Zhou et al. 2022). 
However, the human intervention process is still heavily 
dependent on expert judgment and its improvement requires 
a systematic and automated approach. 
 With the motivation of extending the IGES tool to 
systematically include all relevant interlinkages from a large 
amount of literature, the current paper proposes an artificial 
intelligence (AI) based natural language processing (NLP) 
methodology to identify the causal links among the SDGs. 
The methodology was applied to Goal 13 on climate action 
due to its cross-cutting nature in the SDG framework. The 
methodology, replicable to other SDGs, and its application, 
including limitations, is explained here in detail. The 
outcome of this research has the potential to greatly 
contribute to the understanding of SDG interlinkages, which 
is of utmost importance for the sustainable development 
agenda in particular and to ensure the wellbeing of global 
citizens and the planet in general. This is consistent with the 
conference thematic topic on using AI for policy alignment 
of climate change goals, the SDGs, and ESG frameworks. 
Methodology 
The methodology of using NLP for automating the process 
of systematically extracting the key SDG interlinkages from 
climate change literature follows six steps (Figure 1). 
Step 1  is selection of literature. We use five assessment 
reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC 1990, 1995, 2001, 2007, 2014) which provide 
comprehensive knowledge on climate change, its causes, 
impacts and response options based on the assessment of 
scientific, technical and socio-economic literature. 
Step 2  is processing the corpus data using NLP. NLP is 
used to extract top frequent terms and map their relations. 
We first clean the data by removing new lines, blank lines, 
and digit terms. Further, we tokenize the text and remove 
punctuation tokens and stop words. We use Porter Stemmer 
to stem the tokens to ensure that different forms of a given 
word map together. 
Step 3  is identifying top frequent terms. We run a hyper-
parameter search on the set of n-grams from the cleaned 
tokens and find that 2, and 3 n-grams are best suited for our 
purpose. We calculate the frequency of all bigrams and 
trigrams and identify top 500 terms (Figure 2). 
  
Figure 1: An NLP-based automated process for 
systematically extracting key SDG interlinkages 
 
Step 4  is mapping the linkages among the top terms. We 
set each top term as a centre term and search if other top 
terms occur in 10 tokens either before or after the centre 
term. The identified terms are defined as the contextual 
terms of the centre term. Each contextual term and its centre 
term form a pair and the associated 10 tokens is defined as 
a contextual sentence describing their linkage. For each 
centre term, we identify top- k contextual terms based on the 
frequency. Additionally, to better understand each linkage, 
we identify the most common pre- and post-verb between 
the centre term and the contextual term. A pre-verb is 
defined where the contextual term occurs followed by the 
verb and then the centre term, while a post-verb is where the 
centre term is followed by the verb and then the contextual 
term. To do so, we rely on NLP and use part-of-speech 
tagging to identify different grammatical components of the 
sentence. 
Step 5  is grouping similar top terms together. The 500 top 
terms have many similarities, such as “adaptation climate 
change, adapt climate change, …” and “climate change 
adapting, climate change adapt, …”. To remove the noise 
caused by different wording, similar terms were grouped 
together. The frequency of each group is the sum of the 
frequency of individual terms in this group. Currently, we 
are exploring the use of word embeddings to automate the 
grouping exercise. As part of an experimental process, we 
used GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Christopher 2014) 
embeddings followed by k-means clustering to group 
similar top terms. For this study, we used Human-in-the-
Loop (using domain experts to refine our NLP system) 
process to group similar top terms.  
 Step 6  is building a qualitative SDG interlinkages model 
by mapping grouped terms with SDG targets and visualising 
the results in a network graph. The model is generic at the 
global level. Further validation and customization to local 
contexts can be conducted through stakeholders’ 
engagement, but this is not included in the current study. 
 
 Results 
An excerpt of the identified top 500 terms and their 
frequency is shown in Figure 2. Since we have stemmed the 
tokens, different forms of a term are grouped together. 
 
 
Figure 2: An excerpt of top 500 terms identified through an 
NLP-based semantic analysis 
 
 From Step 4, 4,600 paired terms among 500 top terms 
were extracted (see Figure 3 as an example). The total score 
is calculated by term frequency-inverse document frequency 
(TF-IDF) for each pair (See Step 4). Each contextual 
sentence or phrase (separated by a comma) describes the 
linkage of the pair. For example, “'extreme', 'weather', 
'events', 'vulnerable', 'regions', 'communities', 'highly', 
'exposed', 'hazardous', 'climate', 'change', 'effects'” implies 
that extreme weather events affected the vulnerable regions 
and communities who are exposed to hazardous climate 
effects. 
 
 
Figure 3: An excerpt of the identified contextual terms of a 
centre term 
 
After grouping similar terms together (Step 5), the number 
of top terms was reduced from 500 to 104 and the number 
of pairs was reduced from 4,600 to 962. After mapping 
grouped terms with relevant SDG targets, a qualitative SDG 
interlinkages model, including 104 nodes and 962 links, was 
established for Goal 13 (climate action). The model was 
visualised in a network graph arranged by the SDGs (see 
Figure 4). For example, there is a link between 
“vulnerability” and “climate change” (indicated in a blue 
edge). To understand how they link, the contextual sentence, 
“'vulnerability', 'climate', 'change', 'determined', 'exposure', 
'impacts', 'climate', 'change'”, can inform us that 
vulnerability to climate change is affected by the exposure 
to the impacts of climate change, among other factors.  
Figure 4: Visualization of the SDG interlinkages model for 
SDG 13 (climate action) 
Note: The visualization was generated using Cytoscape. Each node 
indicates a grouped term which size indicates the frequency. The 
code in parentheses indicates relevant SDG targets. Nodes under 
the same SDG are placed close to each other. The edge between a 
pair represents a linkage, which width is measured by TF-IDF. 
 
The frequency of the top terms (indicated by the size of 
the node), shows the scientific importance of relevant 
factors and actors. Figure 4 shows that climate change-
related factors, such as global warming, extreme climate 
events, sea level rise and precipitation, are the most frequent 
terms. Other factors including GHG emissions, climate 
mitigation and adaptation, agricultural production, land use 
and land cover change (LULUC), environmental impacts 
and vulnerability, among others, are also on the top list.  
The results can be shown in sub-models focusing on one 
or a few factors. Figure 5 is an example of climate 
adaptation and its linkages with the SDGs. Adaptation to 
climate change links with both adaptation policy and 
mitigation policy. Adaptation influenced by the adaptive 
capacity, climate risks and vulnerabilities, particularly of the 
poor. Key areas of adaptation include agricultural 
production, water resource management, natural resource 
management, rural development and coastal areas.  
 
 
Figure 5: Linkages between climate adaptation and SDGs 
 
 
 Discussions and Future  Research Agenda 
This paper presents a novel methodology of using natural 
language processing to automating the identification of 
SDG 13 (climate action) interlinkages within the SDGs from 
a large corpus based on the IPCC assessment reports. A 
qualitative SDG interlinkages model for SDG 13 was built 
systematically and visualized in a network graph. The 
proposed methodology can be extended by systematically 
analysing the SDG interlinkages of all other SDGs. 
Previously, this process was highly manual and required an 
overwhelming effort from the experts. In this work, we have 
successfully reduced the time to build an interlinkage model 
by about 30 times. This could only have been achieved by 
using an NLP-based automating process. Additionally, this 
has enabled the use of a large corpus to find such linkages.  
 The SDG interlinkages model and its visualization can be 
used as a practical tool to communicate among the 
stakeholders in national and local climate policy 
development. This tool can be used but not limited to the 
following ways:   
• To support systematic policy scoping in the early stage of 
policy development 
 Together with stakeholders’ engagement, the list of top 
frequent terms can be used for systematic scoping and 
screening of key factors, sectors and actors to be considered 
in national and local climate policies based on the local 
context. For example, in vulnerable and low-income 
countries, adaptation policy development should take full 
account of the poor, particularly poor women and children. 
• To support integrated policy making and cross-sector 
collaborations 
 In climate policy development, the key linkages including 
the synergies, trade-offs and feedback among major factors 
and sectors should be taken account to ensure policy 
integrity and inclusiveness. Furthermore, relevant 
departments, sectors and local governments related to the 
key synergies and trade-offs in the systems of climate 
change and climate action should be included in the policy-
making process to ensure integrated governance and budget 
allocation by collectively addressing the trade-offs and 
leverage the synergies. For example, Figure 5 implies that 
effective governance for climate adaptation planning and 
implementation should include relevant competent 
departments in charge of agriculture, natural resource 
management, water resource management, and public 
health, etc. The results from this research provide scientific 
evidence on the synergies and trade-offs to support 
integrated institutional arrangement and budget allocation.  
• To support climate policy making tailored to the local 
context 
 To support the development of a long-term climate 
mitigation strategy (LTS) in West Java Province, Indonesia, 
an engagement of more than 50 stakeholders from national and local governments, state-owned enterprises, the private 
sector, NGOs, academia, and the media, was conducted 
from June to July in 2022 to validate and contextualise the 
SDG interlinkages model for Goal 13 (Moinuddin and Zhou 
2022). The activity was conducted through an online survey 
(55 participants) and a focus group discussion (40 
participants) to receive feedback on four specific topics in 
West Java: renewable energy development, gender 
dimension of low carbon development, economic and 
employment impacts, and climate change policy measures 
and their impacts. This exercise not only raises the 
awareness of taking an integrated approach but also helps 
validate the model with the feedback on the linkages of 
climate change and climate action with SDGs from West 
Java’s perspective. The tailored SDG interlinkages model 
for West Java can be used to inform the policy makers about 
key factors and key linkages in the development of the LTS. 
 A couple of limitations of the existing methodology were 
identified which can be set as future research agenda. These 
include: i) building a methodology for selecting relevant and 
high quality scientific literature from large bibliographic 
databases (e.g. Google Scholar and Scopus); ii) improving 
the pre-processing of the corpus data (Step 2) including 
identifying effective stop words, using part-of-speech 
tagging to help select effective terms and remove irrelevant 
terms, and avoiding truncation in the full phrase, etc.; and 
iii) automating the process of effectively grouping similar 
terms by leveraging word embeddings and large language 
models such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) (Step 5) and 
mapping with the SDGs (Step 6). All the above-mentioned 
challenges can be effectively solved by using state-of-the-
art NLP methods, and we are confident that this work will 
open several possible avenues for further research in the area 
of using AI to respond to climate challenges. 
Acknowledgments 
This research was conducted under the project of ‘Using AI 
to Impute Missing Data in the SDG Indicators and Test 
Causality’, funded by Google’s AI for Social Good 
program. This research was also supported by FY2021 
Strategic Research Fund of the Institute for Global 
Environmental Strategies (IGES). 
References 
Allen, C.; Metternicht, G.; and Wiedmann, T. 2018. Prioritising 
SDG Targets: Assessing Baseline s, Gaps and Interlinkages. 
Sustainability Science  14(2): 421–438. 
Devlin, J.; Chang, M.; Lee, K. ; and Toutanova, K. 2018. BERT: 
Pre-Training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language 
Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the 
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and  
 Short Papers): 4171–4186. Minnesota: Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. 
Dörgő, G.; Sebestyén, V.; and Abonyi, J. 2018. Evaluating the 
Interconnectedness of the Sustainable Development Goals Based on the Causality Analysis of Sustainability Indicators. Sustainability  10(10): 3766. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10103766. 
ICSU. 2017. A Guide to SDG Interactions: From Science to 
Implementation. Paris: International Council for Science. 
IPCC. 1990. First Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Switzerland: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 
IPCC. 1995. Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change . Switzerland: Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC). 
IPCC. 2001. Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Switzerland: Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC). 
IPCC. 2007. Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Switzerland: Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC). 
IPCC. 2014. Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Switzerland: Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC). 
Le Blanc, D. 2015. Towards Integration at Last? The Sustainable 
Development Goals as a Network of Targets. Sustainable 
Development  23(3): 176–187. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.1582. 
Miola, A.; Borchardt, S.; Neher, F.; and Buscaglia, D. 2019. 
Interlinkages and Policy Coherence for the Sustainable Development Goals implementation: An Operational Method to Identify Trade-offs and Co-benefits in a Systemic Way. Brussels: 
European Commission, Joint Research Centre. 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/472928. 
Moinuddin, M; and Zhou, X. 2022. Interlinkages of the Transition 
to a Low-Carbon Society and Achieving Sustainable Development 
Goals in West Java, Indonesia. Presentation at the IGES-SDG 
Center UNPAD Focus Group Discussion Workshop. Online, July 
14th. 
Nilsson, M.; Griggs, D.; and Visback, M. 2016. Policy: Map the 
Interactions between Sustainable Development Goals. Nature  534: 
320–322. https://doi.org/10.1038/534320a. 
Pennington, J.; Socher, R.; and Manning, C. 2014. GloVe: Global 
Vectors for Word Representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 
(EMNLP): 1532–1543. Doha, Qatar: Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 10.3115/v1/D14-1162. 
Zhou, X.; and Moinuddin, M. 2017. Sustainable Development 
Goals Interlinkages and Network Analysis: A practical tool for SDG integration and policy coherence. Research Report No. 
RR1602. Hayama: Institute for Global Environmental Strategies 
(IGES). https://pub.iges.or.jp/pub/sustainable-development-goals-
interlinkages. Accessed: 2021-12-03. 
Zhou, X.; Moinuddin, M.; and Li, Y. 2021. SDG Interlinkages 
Analysis & Visualisation Tool (V4.0). Hayama: Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies (IGES). 
https://sdginterlinkages.iges.jp/visualisationtool.html. Accessed: 
2022-01-22. 
Zhou, X.; Moinuddin, M.; Renaud, F. ; Barrett, B.; Xu, J.; Liang, 
Q.; Zhao, J.; Xia, X.; Bosher, L.; Huang, S.; and Hoey, T. 2022. 
Development of an SDG Interlinkages Analysis Model at the River 
Basin Scale: A Case Study in the Luanhe River Basin, China. Sustainability Science  17: 1405-1433. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-021-01065-z.
 