Contrastive Learning for Climate Model Bias Correction and Super-Resolution
Tristan Ballard, Gopal Erinjippurath
Sust Global
San Francisco, California
Abstract
Climate models often require post-processing in order to
make accurate estimates of local climate risk. The most
common post-processing applied is bias-correction and spa-
tial resolution enhancement. However, the statistical meth-
ods typically used for this not only are incapable of captur-
ing multivariate spatial correlation information but are also
reliant on rich observational data often not available outside
of developed countries, limiting their potential. Here we pro-
pose an alternative approach to this challenge based on a
combination of image super resolution (SR) and contrastive
learning generative adversarial networks (GANs). We bench-
mark performance against NASA’s flagship post-processed
CMIP6 climate model product, NEX-GDDP. We find that our
model successfully reaches a spatial resolution double that
of NASA’s product while also achieving comparable or im-
proved levels of bias correction in both daily precipitation
and temperature. The resulting higher fidelity simulations of
present and forward-looking climate can enable more local,
accurate models of hazards like flooding, drought, and heat-
waves.
1 Introduction
Global climate models by design are imperfect simulations
of the physical world. While leading climate models like
those in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase
6 (CMIP6) incorporate known phenomena like the laws of
thermodynamics, other phenomena like cloud condensation
have no known equations and require developers to include
imprecise estimates. What’s more, climate models are run
at spatial resolutions too coarse to simulate key phenom-
ena like convective precipitation, tropical cyclone dynamics,
and local effects from topography and land cover (microcli-
mates). This leads to a variety of known and unknown er-
rors, or biases, in projections of fundamental variables like
temperature and precipitation.
Climate model errors reduce the accuracy of projections
of climate hazards like heatwaves and flooding, motivating
the development of bias correction methods. These meth-
ods (Section 2) generally involve deriving correction fac-
tors to better align modeled historical values with observed
historical values. The correction factors are then applied
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
ClimaGANRaw CMIP6
Raw CMIP6
ClimaGAN
Precipitation [mm/day]
Temperature [°C]Figure 1: Application of the ClimaGAN network to a CMIP6
test set image (May 18, 1994) yields bias-corrected and 4x
(0.5◦→0.125◦) super-resolution outputs. The network can
be applied to CMIP6 daily simulations out to 2100.
to forward-looking modeled values and are widely imple-
mented in the climate impacts community. Indeed, forward-
looking estimates of future flood risk typically use bias-
corrected precipitation rather than the raw climate model
data [1]. To enable local, accurate hazard models requires
high fidelity, bias-corrected simulations of present-day and
forward looking fundamental variables.
Recent advances in AI including in image super-
resolution (SR) and unpaired image-to-image translation
suggest substantial promise to improve over existing bias
correction methods. These AI models can flexibly incorpo-
rate multivariate and spatial relationships in ways not pos-
sible with existing approaches. For instance, AI-based SR
has shown superior performance in enhancing the spatial
resolution of wildfires [2], precipitation [3, 4, 5], and wind
[6, 7]. Meanwhile, unpaired generative adversarial networks
(GANs) have shown promise in applications to temperature
[8] and precipitation [8, 9].
Here we propose ClimaGAN, a novel SR and un-
paired image-to-image translation GAN architecture oper-
ating on 3-channel geospatial datasets, incorporating tem-perature, precipitation, and elevation. We validate and com-
pare ClimaGAN performance against a NASA benchmark
algorithm, showcasing ClimaGAN performance on a lead-
ing CMIP6 model over a region spanning the contiguous
U.S.
2 Related Work
There are several methods for bias-correcting and resolu-
tion enhancement (downscaling) of climate variables, but
the predominant method implemented in the climate com-
munity is the bias-correction spatial disaggregation (BCSD)
algorithm. For example, BCSD, proposed in 2002 [10], is
the method used for NASA’s flagship CMIP6 bias-corrected
product [11](Section 3.4). The bias-correction portion of
BCSD is achieved through simple quantile mapping be-
tween modeled and observed cumulative distribution func-
tions. The resolution enhancement is achieved through ap-
plication of Fourier transforms.
The chief limitation of the (BCSD) algorithm used in
NASA’s NEX-GDDP product [11] is that it is a simple sta-
tistical method incapable of incorporating auxiliary datasets
or spatial variability. For example, the only data that can
be used to bias correct a modeled temperature dataset us-
ing BCSD is an observed temperature dataset. However, we
know that temperature biases are tightly linked to local fea-
tures like elevation [12]. BCSD also implements bias cor-
rection independently for each pixel, ignoring spatial cor-
relation structure that can provide useful signal for further
reducing biases.
BCSD also does not permit multivariate relationships be-
tween climate variables, despite the fact that most climate
variables covary. Bias correcting temperature independently
from precipitation, for example, can inadvertently introduce
unrealistic relationships, particularly for extremes [13]. Bi-
variate BCSD has been proposed but has not been widely
adopted [13].
We are aware of two recent AI-based approaches for cli-
mate model bias correction, but neither incorporate spatial
resolution enhancement. Both approaches are based on un-
paired image-to-image translation, with one adapting the cy-
cleGAN framework [9] and the other using UNIT [8]. Ex-
treme learning machines have also been proposed as an al-
ternative to BCSD [14].
3 Data
Geospatial data coded as input images to the model archi-
tecture (Fig. 2) have 3 channels, corresponding to maps of
daily temperature, daily precipitation, and elevation. Low
resolution (LR) input images come from CMIP6 climate
model simulations regridded to a common 0.5° resolution,
while high resolution (HR) input images come from ob-
served weather data regridded to a common 0.125° (14km)
resolution.
The study area covers the contiguous U.S., southern
Canada, and northern Mexico, spanning 23°N and 49°N
and 125°W and 65°W (Fig. 1). The LR input images are
of dimension 54x120x3 while HR images are of dimension
216x480x3.We train the model on 24 years of data from 1985 to 2014,
setting aside 6 years [1990, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2008, 2012]
of data in that period for testing. This results in 8,756 daily
images for training and 2,194 daily images for testing.
3.1 CMIP6 climate model simulations
We demonstrate the ClimaGAN network with the U.S. Na-
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Geophys-
ical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory model GFDL-CM4, a lead-
ing CMIP6 model [15]. The ClimaGAN network can be re-
trained and applied to any of the CMIP6 models, an exten-
sion of the current research we are actively pursuing (Sec-
tion 7). The network can also be applied to corresponding
CMIP6 forward looking (2015-2100) projections to derive
estimates of future hazards (not shown).
While CMIP6 models simulate a range of climate vari-
ables, we focus here on simulations of daily maximum
temperature and daily precipitation because these are often
needed to derive climate hazards. The historical CMIP6 sim-
ulations incorporate known values of carbon emissions, so-
lar activity, and volcanic eruptions, among other inputs.
3.2 Elevation
We incorporate elevation data from the National Center for
Atmospheric Research [16] as a supplementary feature to
inform bias correction. Elevation is an important driver of
local climate, so we expect it to be informative in bias cor-
recting both temperature and precipitation.
3.3 Observations
We use the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF) ERA5-Land data for observed daily
maximum temperature and daily precipitation [17]. The re-
analysis data has global coverage at approximately 9km res-
olution over land, which we regrid to a coarser 0.125° for
the analysis.
3.4 NASA NEX-GDDP benchmark product
We benchmark model performance against NASA’s flagship
CMIP6 bias-corrected product, NEX-GDDP [11]. NEX-
GDDP is based on the BCSD algorithm (Section 2). We
use the daily maximum temperature and precipitation NEX-
GDDP data corresponding to the same GFDL-CM4 model,
such that outputs between the two methods are directly com-
parable. NEX-GDDP data is available at 0.25° resolution.
Beyond the technical limitations of NEX-GDDP (Section
2), practical limitations for users are that it is not updated
with the latest observational datasets and covers only a few
variables and climate scenarios. The amount of available ob-
servational data is projected to increase substantially with
the release of new satellite and sensor datasets, yet NEX-
GDDP will not begin to incorporate that new data until the
release of CMIP7 years from now, if at all. This means that
any advances in monitoring in data-poor regions, such as in
many developing countries, will not be incorporated. Fur-
ther, NEX-GDDP only covers 9 climate variables from the
ScenarioMIP project, despite there being hundreds of other
variables and MIP projects within CMIP6 of interest to re-
searchers, limiting its scope.22CMIP6Daily imageGenerator
DiscriminatorObservations(ERA5)BiasCorrectedCMIP6TemperaturePrecipitationElevationSuper-Resolution(4x)0.5°0.125°
0.125°Figure 2: The ClimaGAN network takes as input daily CMIP6 climate data, as well as supplementary features like elevation,
and outputs corresponding high-resolution, bias-corrected daily data. The network combines two key modules: super-resolution
(SR) and a contrastive unpaired translation GAN. The SR layers enhance spatial resolution by 4x (0.5◦→0.125◦), while the
GAN iteratively learns to bias-correct climate model inputs from comparisons with real-world observations.
4 Methodology
4.1 ClimaGAN Architecture
We identified four key design goals for our network archi-
tecture:
• Unpaired image-to-image translation
• Content preservation
• Spatial resolution enhancement (super-resolution)
• Multivariate input and output variables
Unpaired image-to-image translation is required because
the daily output from a CMIP6 model is not expected to
directly match observations for the corresponding date, a
challenge for typical bias-correction methods. For example,
CMIP6 temperature simulations for Jan 1, 2010 are not, by
design, expected to match observed conditions on that date.
They instead are expected to provide a realistic simulation
of what the weather could have been on that date.
Content preservation is the idea that the bias-corrected
output variables should maintain the content of the CMIP6
inputs while taking on the appearance of real-world condi-
tions. Content preservation in the context of GANs is typi-
cally preserved through adding a cycle-consistency loss term
[18].
To achieve these design goals, we designed a network
(ClimaGAN) that combines super-resolution and a con-
trastive unpaired translation GAN (Fig. 2). The input LR im-
ages passed through the network first go through two SR lay-
ers that enhance spatial resolution by 4x. These SR imagesare then passed through a generator network. The discrimi-
nator compares the output images with observation images
to determine which image is ’real’ (observation) and which
image is ’fake’ (bias-corrected and super-resolved CMIP6).
The generator and discriminator networks along with the
super-resolution layers are trained concurrently. As the gen-
erator and discriminator improve, so does the level of bias-
correction, creating output climate images that are increas-
ingly difficult to distinguish from real-world observations.
The generator consists of 9 Resnet blocks in between two
upscaling layers (‘encoder’) and two downscaling layers
(‘decoder’). The discriminator consists of 3 convolutional
layers. The network contains approximately 14M parame-
ters, and we train it for 20 epochs on an NVIDIA Tesla A100
GPU.
One of the key advances of this network is the imple-
mentation of a contrastive unpaired translation GAN. The
contrastive unpaired translation is an advancement in GANs
released in 2020 from the team who created cycleGAN, a
leading framework for unpaired image-to-image translation
[19]. Contrastive unpaired translation appears to outperform
cycleGANs in both accuracy and efficiency [19]. Briefly,
the network incorporates a InfoNCE loss term [20] in ad-
dition to the adversarial loss of a standard GAN [19]. The
InfoNCE loss works by sampling patches of the output im-
age and ensuring that the samples are similar to the corre-
sponding patches of the input image. At the same time, the
InfoNCE loss discourages the sampled patches from being
too similar to other patches of the input image. This lossTemperaturePrecipitation
ObservationClimaGAN (ours)NASA NEX-GDDPRaw CMIP6
Temperature [°C]Precipitation [mm/day]
Figure 3: ClimaGAN quantitatively and qualitatively enhances CMIP6 mean daily temperature (top) and daily precipitation
(bottom) in a held out test set ( n=2,194 daily images). The scatter plots show the pixel-by-pixel correlations against observations
across the U.S., while the maps show the southwestern U.S.
term achieves content preservation. Further details on In-
foNCE loss and the corresponding architecture additions can
be found in Park et al.[19] We use the same default hyper-
parameters for the number and size of patches as in Park et
al. [19]
4.2 Validation
To validate the model, we measure correspondence between
observations and ClimaGAN output on a held out test set
(Section 3). We selected four statistical measures to as-
sess the fidelity of model simulations in representing the
observed statistical distribution: mean, standard deviation,
skew, and the 98thpercentile. The 98thpercentile reflects the
ability of the model to capture extremes. These statistics are
computed for each pixel and then plotted as maps (Fig. 3) or
aggregated across pixels using R2(Tables 1 and 2).
5 Results
We find that ClimaGAN substantially improves CMIP6 in-
put simulations of daily temperature and precipitation, not
only enhancing spatial resolution 4x to 0.125◦but also lead-
ing to reductions in bias when evaluated on the held out test
set.
We first evaluate performance enhancement qualitatively
by comparing maps of observed conditions against modeled
(Fig. 3). Figure 3 shows mean conditions over the collection
of daily test set images. Visually, the ClimaGAN-enhanced
CMIP6 conditions much better match observed compared
with the raw CMIP6 input, capturing local spatial variability
with higher accuracy. In California, the Central Valley is re-
flected clearly in enhanced temperatures, while the eastward
Sierra Nevada mountains are reflected by a band of elevated
precipitation, distinctions not immediately apparent in the
original CMIP6 data (Fig. 3).Temperature Mean SD Skew Q98
ClimaGAN (ours) 0.98 0.97 0.26 0.94
NASA NEX-GDDP 0.96 0.90 0.69 0.86
Raw CMIP6 0.94 0.88 0.42 0.75
Table 1: ClimaGAN applied to daily maximum temperature
shows an enhancement of raw CMIP6 inputs in out of sam-
ple test set years ( n=2,194 daily images) across all four eval-
uation metrics over the U.S. and outperforms NASA’s prod-
uct except for distribution skew. Q98 = 98thpercentile.
Precipitation Mean SD Skew Q98
ClimaGAN (ours) 0.85 0.80 0.39 0.78
NASA NEX-GDDP 0.86 0.81 0.42 0.80
Raw CMIP6 0.78 0.69 0.37 0.72
Table 2: ClimaGAN applied to daily precipitation shows an
enhancement of raw CMIP6 inputs in out of sample test set
years ( n=2,194 daily images) across all four evaluation met-
rics over the U.S., though NASA’s product slightly outper-
forms ClimaGAN. Q98 = 98thpercentile.
Next, we evaluate performance enhancement quantita-
tively in the held out test set, finding ClimaGAN improves
over raw CMIP6 data across all four statistical measures for
precipitation and across three of four statistical measures for
temperature (Tables 1 and 2). For temperature, mean daily
temperature improves from an R2of 94% with the original
CMIP6 data to an R2of 98% after applying ClimaGAN (Fig.
3; Table 1). We also find that extreme temperature, repre-
sented by the 98thpercentile, improves from an R2of 75%
to an R2of 94% (Table 1). Likewise for precipitation, meandaily precipitation improves from an R2of 78% with the
original data to an R2of 85% after applying ClimaGAN
(Fig. 3; Table 2). We also find that extreme precipitation,
represented by the 98thpercentile, improves from an R2of
72% to an R2of 78% (Table 2). The weaker performance of
ClimaGAN on distributional skew suggests improvements
can be made in capturing aspects of extremes, with one po-
tential cause we are exploring further being the initial nor-
malization steps applied to the data inputs.
While these performance enhancements from ClimaGAN
are promising, we are next curious how they compare
against enhancements from a benchmark product, NASA’s
NEX-GDDP bias corrected dataset.
Benchmarking ClimaGAN performance against NASA’s
product, the first key qualitative distinction is that Clima-
GAN outperforms NASA’s product in capturing local spatial
variability (Fig. 3). This is because ClimaGAN implements
SR to twice the spatial resolution (0.125°) of NASA’s prod-
uct (0.25°). Visually, the ClimaGAN-enhanced CMIP6 con-
ditions better match observations compared with NASA’s
product for temperature (Fig. 3). For precipitation, NASA’s
product appears to better match observations in some areas,
in part because it has less spatial variability than ClimaGAN
(Fig. 3).
Benchmarking performance quantitatively, we find that
ClimaGAN leads to comparable or improved levels of bias
correction as NASA’s product. For temperature, ClimaGAN
outperforms NASA’s product on 3 of 4 metrics consid-
ered, failing to improve the distributional skew metric (Table
1). Particularly promising is that ClimaGAN yields an R2
of 94% for extreme 98thpercentile temperature, compared
with 86% for NASA’s product (Table 1). For precipitation,
NASA’s product outererforms ClimaGAN on all 4 metrics,
but the diffrences in performance are small, with R2differ-
ences ranging from only 1-3% (Table 2).
6 Conclusion
Here we propose a framework for bias correcting and super-
resolving daily climate model inputs to enable more accu-
rate and high spatial resolution simulations of present day
and future risk. The framework has several key advantages
compared to other commonly employed approaches. First,
it allows for superior levels of data-driven spatial resolution
enhancement using super-resolution techniques. Second, it
jointly bias corrects climate variables, allowing the model
to learn from the multivariate relationship between climate
variables and more accurately represent multivariate hazards
like drought. Third, it flexibly incorporates additional geo-
science variables like elevation to inform bias-correction.
We find that ClimaGAN yields comparable or improved
levels of bias-correction at twice the spatial resolution
(14km) of NASA’s leading product (25km). This is excit-
ing in part because there are numerous modifications to the
network possible that could improve performance (Section
7), while NASA’s product can only improve as the qual-
ity of observational data improves. Moreover, NASA typi-
cally releases and updates their product once every several
years, while ClimaGAN can be regularly updated with thelatest sources of data. We expect this ability to update Clima-
GAN with the latest observational data as it comes online
as well as learn relationships in data-rich regions will help
improve bias correction and SR in historically data-poor re-
gions, such as in many developing countries (Section 7).
Validation results for ClimaGAN suggest substantial po-
tential for high resolution, enhanced accuracy projections of
climate risk. Improvements in spatial resolution are critical
to capturing local, asset-level effects of climate hazards. We
found bias-correction improvements to the raw input data
across metrics (Tables 1 and 2), and we highlight that the im-
provements for extreme precipitation and extreme tempera-
ture will enable more accurate projections of hazards like
heatwaves and inland flooding. The higher fidelity simula-
tions of present and forward-looking climate variables made
possible by applying ClimaGAN can enable more local, ac-
curate models of climate hazards, supporting climate scien-
tists and a broad range of stakeholders alike.
7 Future Directions
We see several avenues for expanding and improving the
ClimaGAN modeling approach. First, we intend to incor-
porate additional global regions and CMIP6 models. Sec-
ond, because ClimaGAN can flexibly integrate additional
input channels, we can include variables like humidity, pres-
sure, and wind to not only bias correct those variables but
also improve accuracy on the temperature and precipitation
variables. Architecture modifications to account for the spar-
sity of precipitation may further improve results, including
distributional skew [21]. Last, while we focus here on sin-
gle image bias correction and SR, we see opportunities for
improved performance on day-to-day variability by using
multi-temporal images, which has been applied to satellite
imagery in the past [22] but never, to our knowledge, to cli-
mate model maps.
References
[1] Salman, A.M. and Y . Li. Flood risk assessment, future
trend modeling, and risk communication: a review of
ongoing research. Nat. Hazards Rev , 19(3), 2018.
[2] Ballard, T. and G. Erinjippurath. FireSRnet:
Geoscience-Driven Super-Resolution of Future
Fire Risk from Climate Change. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.12353 , 2020.
[3] Jianxin Cheng, Qiuming Kuang, Chenkai Shen, Jin
Liu, Xicheng Tan, and Wang Liu. Reslap: Generat-
ing high-resolution climate prediction through image
super-resolution. IEEE Access , 8:39623–39634, 2020.
[4] Vandal, T., E. Kodra, S. Ganguly, and A. Michaelis.
Deepsd: Generating high resolution climate change
projections through single image super-resolution.
Proceedings of the 23rd acm sigkdd international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining ,
2017.
[5] Vaughan, A., N.D. Lane, and M. Herzog. Multi-
variate climate downscaling with latent neural pro-
cesses. Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learn-
ing ICML Workshop , 2021.[6] Kurinchi-Vendhan, R., B. Lutjens, R. Gupta, L.
Werner, and D. Newman. WiSoSuper: Benchmarking
Super-Resolution Methods on Wind and Solar Data.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08770 , 2021.
[7] Stengel, K., A. Glaws, D. Hettinger, and R.N. King.
Adversarial super-resolution of climatological wind
and solar data. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences , 117(29), 2020.
[8] Fulton, J.D. and B.J. Clarke. Towards debiasing cli-
mate simulations using unsupervised image-to-image
translation networks. Tackling Climate Change with
Machine Learning NeurIPS Workshop , 2021.
[9] Pan, B., G.J. Anderson, A. Goncalves, D.D. Lucas,
C.J.W. Bonfils, J. Lee, Y . Tian, and H. Ma. Learn-
ing to Correct Climate Projection Biases. Journal of
Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 13(10), 2021.
[10] Wood, A.W., E.P. Maurer, A. Kumar, and D.P. Letten-
maier. Long-range experimental hydrologic forecast-
ing for the eastern United States. Journal of Geophys-
ical Research Atmospheres , 107(D20), 2002.
[11] Thrasher, B., W. Wange, A. Michaelis, F. Melton, T.
Lee, and R. Nemani. NASA Global Daily Downscaled
Projections, CMIP6. Scientific Data , 9(1), 2022.
[12] Y . Lun, L. Liu, L. Cheng, X. Li, H. Li, and Z. Xu. As-
sessment of GCMs simulation performance for precip-
itation and temperature from CMIP5 to CMIP6 over
the Tibetan Plateau. International Journal of Clima-
tology , 41(7), 2021.
[13] Li, C., E. Sinha, D.E. Horton, N.S. Diffenbaugh, and
A.M. Michalak. Joint bias correction of temperature
and precipitation in climate model simulations. Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres , 119(23),
2014.
[14] Zhang, S., F. Chen, X. He, and B. Liu. A new down-
scaling approach and its performance with bias correc-
tion and spatial disaggregation as contrast. Journal of
Water and Climate Change , 8(4), 2017.
[15] Held, I., H. Guo, A. Adcroft, J.P. Dunne, L.W.
Horowitz, J. Krasting, E. Shevliakova, M. Winton, M.
Zhao, M. Bushuk, and A.T. Wittenberg. Structure and
performance of GFDL’s CM4.0 climate model. Jour-
nal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 11(11),
2019.
[16] National Geophysical Data Center/NESDIS-
/NOAA/U.S. Department of Commerce. TerrainBase,
Global 5 Arc-minute Ocean Depth and Land Elevation
from the US National Geophysical Data Center
(NGDC).
[17] Munoz-Sabater, J., E. Dutra, A. Agusti-Panareda,
C. Albergel, G. Arduini, G. Balsamo, S. Bous-
setta, M. Choulga, S. Harrigan, H. Hersbach, and B.
Martens. ERA5-Land: A state-of-the-art global reanal-
ysis dataset for land applications. Earth System Sci-
ence Data , 13(9), 2021.
[18] Zhu, J.Y ., T. Park, P. Isola, and A.A. Efros. Unpaired
image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent ad-versarial networks. Proceedings of the IEEE inter-
national conference on computer vision , 2223-2232,
2017.
[19] Park, T., A.A. Efros, R. Zhang, and J.Y . Zhu. Con-
trastive learning for unpaired image-to-image transla-
tion. European conference on computer vision , 319-
345, 2020.
[20] Oord, A. Y . Li, and O. Vinyals. Representation learn-
ing with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018.
[21] Pathak, J., S. Subramanian, P. Harrington, S. Raja, A.
Chattopadhyay, M. Mardani, T. Kurth, D. Hall, Z. Li,
Z. Azizzadenesheli, and P. Hassanzadeh. Fourcastnet:
A global data-driven high-resolution weather model
using adaptive fourier neural operators. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.11214 , 2022.
[22] Deudon, M., A. Kalaitzis, I. Goytom, Md.R. Arefin,
Z. Lin, K. Sankaran, V . Michalski, S.E. Kahou, J.
Cornebise, and Y . Bengio. Highres-net: Recursive fu-
sion for multi-frame super-resolution of satellite im-
agery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06460 , 2020.