 AI-Based Text Analysis for Evaluati ng Food Waste Polic ies 
John A. Aitken,1 Denali W. Rao, Balca Alaybek, Amber Sprenger, Grace Mika, Rob Hartman, 
Laura Leets   
The MITRE Corporation  
1jaitken@mitre.org  
 
 
 
Abstract  
Food waste is a major contributor to climate change, making 
the reduction of food waste one of the most important strate-
gies to preserve threatened ecosystems and increase eco-
nomic benefits. To evaluate the impact of food waste policies 
in this arena and provide actionable guidance to policym ak-
ers, we conducted  an AI -based  text analysis of  food waste 
policy provisions . Specifically, we  used unsupervised ma-
chine learning to  a) identif y commonalities across state pol-
icy texts, b) cluster states by shared policy text, and c) exam-
ine relationships  between  state cluster membership s and food 
waste. This approach generated  state clusters  but demon-
strate d very limited  convergent validity with policy ratings 
provided by subject matter experts and no predictive validity 
with food waste. We discuss the po tential of  using  supervised 
machine learning to analyze food waste policy text as a next 
step. 
 
Keywords: food waste ; date label policy; text analysis  
Introduction  
Food waste is one of the most  significant driver s of climate 
change, constituting  up to  10% of all greenhouse gas emis-
sions , 14% of all water use , 18% of all cropland use , and 
24% of all landfill content (Hall et al., 20 09; Quested, Ingle, 
and Parry, 2013 ). The reduction of food waste is a key cli-
mate change strategy (Hawke n, 2017),  and is  a challenge 
that depends on a host of actors across all steps of the supply 
chain. Strong  federal  and state policy is one of the most 
promising avenues for mitigating food waste and stimulat-
ing food recovery  (Evans and Nagele, 2018) . One key food 
waste polic y in this area  and which is well-represented at the 
state level is date label policy.   
 Date label policy applies to  whether manufacturers must 
include labels on certain food (e.g., milk, meat) and whether 
the product may be sold past the date, and other  require-
ments  such as the use of specific terminology (e.g., “Best 
 
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelli-
gence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.  
 by,” “Sell by,” “Use by”) . Currently , instead of a  federally -
enforced  standard policy, there is a patchwork of date label 
policies across states  that grants free reign to manufacturers 
and, in turn, creates confusion for consumers (Broad Leib 
and Pollans, 2019; Broad Leib et al., 2016) . For example, 
consum ers may incorrectly believe that food should be dis-
carded once past its date, whereas some dates may only be 
indicators of quality rather than wholesomeness ( Busetti, 
2019 ). It has been suggested that states with more extensive 
date label policy (i.e., mor e requirements  and/or restrictions) 
contribute to  rather than reduce food waste ( Lipinski et al., 
2013; Povich, 20 20). However, there is a paucity of empiri-
cal evidence regarding the impact of these policies on rele-
vant outcomes.  
 Therefore, it is essential to empirically evaluate  the extent 
to which state date label  polic ies contribute to waste and im-
pacts the environment. One challenge in accomplishing this 
goal is that these policies can be generally opaque due to 
legal jargon  and require expert analysis to distill. For exam-
ple, beyond reading and comprehending a state’s date label 
policy , an expert must also be able to evaluate the strengths 
and weakness of the policy with respect to relevant policy at 
the federal level and in ot her states as well as with respect 
to the nuances of the issue at hand (i.e., knowing which pol-
icy features are more or less beneficial in combating climate 
change). In such an evaluation , subject matter experts may 
differ in the extent to which they agree  about which policy 
features  should be considered  (i.e., which are most relevant 
to the efficacy of the policy) as well as how to judge  quali-
tative aspects of the policy (e.g., strength, extensiveness) , 
requiring prolonged discussions and recalibration . Such an 
effort is extensive and time -consuming, which is far from 
ideal given the significance of food waste in driving climate 
change and the urgency for policymakers to craft effective 
and relevant policies.  
 
 
 
©2022 The MITRE Corporation. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.Approved for  Public Release; Distribution Unlimited. Public Release Case Number 2 2-2533 
  2 
  In this respect, text analysis with the aid of  artificial in-
telligence (AI) represents a promising avenue of policy eval-
uation in the food waste and climate change domains.  First, 
AI-based text analysis may be an extremely efficient tool in 
analyzing large quantities of policy text  and rendering a list 
of key characteristics that differentiates one state’s policy 
from another. This would greatly benefit domain experts 
and researchers in general by functioning as a powerful and 
flexible tool in many climate change policy areas ( Short , 
McKenny, and Reid , 2018 ). For example, there may be a 
high degree of shared text between policy texts  that may in-
dicate  similarit ies between state policies . Also, there may be 
unique features of certain policies differentiat ing them from  
others . Overall, then, legislative text reuse and analysis 
could serve  as a window into the spread of political influ-
ence (Wilkerson, Smith , and Stramp , 2015 ).  
 Moreover , developing an analytical method that can sum-
marize and evaluate climate change  policy text may allow 
for non -experts to investigate and interpret this policy area . 
This enables a multidisciplinary approach to a typically 
complex legislative area, and such an approach is crucial 
given the scope of climate change and it s causes (of interest 
to this paper, f ood waste) as well as  the variety of domains 
(e.g., environmental  science , political  science , social sci-
ence)  and stakeholders (e.g., federal agencies,  nonprofit or-
ganizations)  involved in addressing these problems . 
 To that end, t he natural language processing field com-
bines AI and computational linguistic techniques and pro-
vides a variety of machine learning approaches  (e.g., super-
vised, unsupervised ) for text analysis . The rest of this paper 
summarizes our application of unsuperv ised machine learn-
ing to food waste  policy text analy sis. Specifically , we per-
formed a text analysis of U.S. state food date label policies  
to derive state clusters that (1) meaningfully represented the 
content of shared policy text, (2) converged with hum an 
subject -matter expert ratings of policies,  and (3) predicted 
food waste. The content, convergent, and predictive v alida-
tion of such a method would contribute to impact analyses 
in not only date label policies but also other climate change 
policy areas.  
Method  
The data for this study included (1) date label policy texts 
from 50 U.S. states  enacted prior to 2012  and (2)  municipal 
solid waste (MSW ; 22–24% of which is estimated to ac-
count for food waste across states, U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency , 2022 ).  
Policy Text Preparation  for Text Analysis  
We processed the policy text at two levels of analysis : enti re 
provision s (i.e., sections  with explicit citation labels)  and in-dividual clauses  within legislative provisions  (i.e., distin-
guished by line breaks and enumeration marks ). We orga-
nized  the data accordingly  and removed duplicate provi-
sions , which resulted in  113 distinct provisions and 1846 
distinct clauses in the  date label policy dataset.  We then to-
kenized the text, using term frequency -inverse document 
frequency  (TF-IDF) weighting  to create token -frequency 
vector s. Finally, we discarded policy f ragments with fewer 
than seven tokens  as they were too short to be meaningful .  
Policy Text Coding for Validation  
Food waste policy subject matter experts (SMEs)  from Har-
vard Law School, Food Law and Policy Clinic  (HFLPC) 
manually coded policy texts to generate  a ground -truth  char-
acterization of the state date label polic ies against which the 
text analysis -derived clusters  could be validated. We used 
three manually coded variables for validation purposes : for 
a given food type, (1) whether a date label i s required, (2) 
whether sale after label date is restricted, and (3) whether 
the policy required the use of specified date label terminol-
ogy (e.g., “use by,” “sell by,” “best by”) . We created three 
respective continuous variables (i.e., DateTotal, SaleTota l, 
and TermTotal) that indicated the number of food types for 
which a given date label policy was enacted in a given state.  
AI-Based Text Analysis Plan  
We took three steps in each policy text analysis. First, we 
applied a standard topic modeling algorithm,  Gensim, to the 
provision token frequency vectors . Given our set of non -uni-
formly structured  text data, topic modeling was the natural 
choice to begin processing and understanding the data.  Alt-
hough  there were  8 distinct food types identified in our da-
taset as policy foci ( Breads & Bakery, Dairy & Eggs, Dry 
Goods, Fresh Meat & Seafood, Frozen, Pr epared Foods, 
Produce, and Ready -to-drink Beverages ), it was important  
to represent the data with more topics than just these 8  to 
capture all possible fragments and more specific food types 
(e.g., Shellfish within the  broader Fresh Meat & Seafood 
category ). Additionally , while it is generally recommended 
to run the Gensim topic modeling algorithm with 300 -500 
topics, we determined that our dataset was unlikely to in-
clude as many distinct topics ( Bradford , 2009 ). Preliminary 
experimentation revealed that ex tracting more than 150 top-
ics yielded many overlapping topics, while extracting fewer 
than 80 topics from the dataset yielded topics that incorpo-
rated unrelated concepts into one. Accordingly , we specified  
the model to generate 100 topics . We represented t he policy 
text fragments as proportions of the 100 topics and com-
puted the cosine similarity between each pair of  policy frag-
ment  topic vectors . We then applied a similarity threshold to 
select only the stronger relationships between policy frag-
ments  and generated a network graph to visualize the results,  3 
plotting fragments as nodes and the relationship s between 
them as edges.   
 Second , we attemp ted to  group the policy fragments by 
their semantic features.  We used agglomerative clustering  
on the previously generated network graph  to detect groups 
of similar policy fragments  and color -coded the graph to re-
flect these clusters . Using a hierarchical clustering method  
like agglomerative clustering allowed us to leave the num-
ber of clusters to create unspecified and explore  how many 
clusters “naturally” emerged from the data . The resulting  
policy fragment  clusters  from this step , since they were 
compute d via the application of  similarity metrics to topic 
modeling  outputs,  represented  equivalence classes under 
topic similarity .  
 Third, we used the policy fragment clusters as features  
and describe d each state as a combination of the features it 
had. These descriptions took the form of feature vectors 
(similar to the topic feature vectors we saw earlier, but with 
one per state instead of per policy fragment). For example, 
when  a state had one policy fragment that fell under  a dairy 
labeling  cluster , had  two that fell under  the shellfish require-
ments cluster, and had no policy about pork (meaning no 
membership in a pork requirements cluster ), each of these 
cluster memberships as well as non-memberships  were in-
corporated in  the state’s feature vector . We then took the co-
sine similarity of these state feature vectors and applied an-
other similarity threshold to select only strong relationships  
between states . From the resulting filtered stat e similarity 
matrix, we generated a network graph using states as the 
nodes in the graph and reflecting the strength of the similar-
ity between them in the lengths of the edges. Finally, we de-
tected clusters of states in the graph and color -coded those 
clusters. We expected t hese state clusters to consist of  states 
that were  similar to each other with respect to  their food date 
label polic y content .  
Results  
Text  Reuse Analysis  
We began by examining verbatim text reuse by employing 
common subsequence analysis  to compute all common sub-
sequences of at least 6 words between each pair of states.  
We then used three analytical techniques : (1) extract ing the 
length of the longest common subsequence between every 
pair of states,  (2) comput ing the number of common subse-
quences shared by each pair of states , and (3) extracting any 
subsequences greater than 6 words long that were common 
to more than two state s. However, this approach failed to 
identify  identical provisions at the section level nor verbatim 
duplication of meaningful policy expressions within provi-
sions . Therefore, we instead shifted our approach to search-
ing for similar  text between policies at  the level of the pro-
vision and of individual clauses, hypothesizing that states with similar policy text share common policy objectives and 
may be clustered as such.   
Date Label Policy Text Analysis  
Beginning with date label policy text at the provision -level, 
we used the topic modeling algorithm to generate  100 top-
ics. Figure 1 shows six of the twelve most significant topics’ 
ten most strongly weighted tokens compared to the fre-
quency of those tokens in the entirety of the text. Some top-
ics were more clea rly interpreted than others: Topic 0  (shell-
fish, tag, dealer, molluscan, shucked, shellstock, etc.)  clearly 
revolve d around shellfish and how they should be caught 
and processed; Topic 2 (egg, milk, carton, pack, size, inch, 
etc.) seem ed to be about specifically egg cartons in contrast 
to milk cartons; and Topic 10  (mean, sandwich, expiration, 
prewrapped,  open, vendor, etc.)  seem ed to be about pre-
wrapped sandwiches and their expiration dates. Each provi-
sion was represented as a vector com bination of the 100 top-
ics generated by our topic modeling algorithm.  
We computed the pairwise cosine similarity between provi-
sions based on this representation and applied a similarity 
threshold of 0.6 (discarding any values below the similarity 
threshol d). Agglomerative clustering (with distance thresh-
old setting of 1.5) identified 20 clusters of provisions. We 
used these clusters as features and represented the states as 
vectors of length 20 denoting which clusters their provisions 
fell into.  Most of th e clusters revolved around a certain food 
type (milk, shellfish, prewrapped sandwiches) while a few 
clusters were more general (pull dates, misbranding),  so the  
number of features a state had was often a reflection of how 
many different food types that state’s date label polic ies ad-
dressed. The number of features a state  had was also partly 
Figure 1. The t en most strongly weighted tokens from some of the top 
twelve most significant topics  (Provision -Level Date Labeling Analysis)   4 
a reflection of how many date -label -related provisions a 
state had in total.  
 Finally, we clustered the states themselves based on the 
feature clusters  (see Figure 2) . We created a binary state fea-
ture matrix, took the cosine similarity of the matrix, and dis-
carded all values less than 0.5. Greedy modularity maximi-
zation yi elded 8 clusters of states, with a modularity score 
of 0.66.  
 Turning now to the clause -level analyses,  many of the 
same significant tokens emerged as in the provision -level 
analysis, implying that the same tokens that were significant 
within a whole prov ision are still the most significant when 
the text is broken into smaller segments. On average, how-
ever, it was harder to ascertain what these topics were  about. 
Also notable  was that t he most significant tokens in these 
topics were  less strongly weighted than the most significant 
tokens in the provision -level topics. It is possible that the 
fragmenting of the text to the clause level also split up im-
portant or key phrases, so that indiv idually each clause had 
fewer key phrases signaling its meaning.  
 Agglomerative clustering (with a distance threshold set-
ting of 4) detected 72 clusters of clauses. These clusters, as 
may be expected, were more homogenous than the clusters 
found at the pro vision -level analysis, both because the unit 
of text was smaller and because there were more clusters for 
them to separate into.  Greedy modularity maximization de-
tected 6 clusters of states , with a modularity score of 0.69 .  
Validation Analyses  
 For conve rgent validat ion (i.e., examining the relation-
ships between state s’ cluster  membership s and SME -coded  
policy variables)  and predictive validation (i.e., examining 
the relationships between state s’ cluster membership s and food waste), we first compute d two continuous s tate topic  
count variable s (i.e., number of topics  within which a given 
state fell under) . One of the continuous variables was based 
on provisions and the other was based on clauses. Also, in 
these variables, we included states that did not have any date 
label policies, which received a value of zero. We computed 
the Kendall’s Tau correlations of the state topic count vari-
ables with the SME coded policy variables and the outcome 
variable (MSW) , and found weak relationships  (τb = 0.19, p 
= .079 for provisions; τb = 0.15, p = .133 for clauses ). More-
over, after excluding the states with no date lab el policies 
from the topic count variable, topic count and DateTotal var-
iables, this correlation remained nonsignificant.  
 In addition, we conducted a series of chi-squared differ-
ence test s to examine whether state clusters were related to 
SME -coded policy variables and MSW. These analyses re-
turned nonsignificant results no matter states with no date 
label policies included.  
Discussion  
Our findings general ly suggested that the unsupervised ma-
chine learning approach for text analysis was able to cluster  
food waste policy fragments and states based on similar fea-
tures that emerged through the text, but the results demon-
strated very limited  convergent validity  with those gener-
ated by  SME  coding and no  predictive validity with the food 
waste outcome . Our work in progress involves validating a 
supervised machine learning approach to analyze policies 
relevant to food waste and climate change.  
 Additionally, future work could  perform more pre-pro-
cessing of the policy text and employ more sophisticated 
natural language proces sing ( NLP ) models . Although we 
started our analyses by preparing  our text with standard  and 
widely used text cleaning  methods , legal text often contains  
additional levels of complexity (e.g., enumerations, hyper -
specific abbreviations , particularly  formal phrasings ) com-
pared to the type of text that our methods are commonly de-
signed for and used on (e.g., social media posts, Wikipedia 
articles).  Therefore, o ur dataset would likely benefit from 
additional processing  that is more approp riate for policy 
text. One potential  direction is to use a tool with pre -trained 
word vectors  such as GloVe  (Pennington, Socher, and Man-
ning, 2014) . Although it would be more computationally ex-
pensive,  GloVe ’s incorporat ion of linguistic  and semantic 
similari ty between words might be useful. For example, 
equating the words “shellfish ” and “ mollusks ” might illumi-
nate some previously hidden  policy  similarities in our da-
taset. Another  potential  tool is LEGAL -BERT  (Chalkidis 
et.al., 2020) . The authors  of LEGAL -BERT faced the same 
issue we note above —that the usefulness of  standard pre-
processing tools may not  generalize to legal tex t. We could 
leverage t heir conclusion  (i.e., pre-training BERT models on 
Figure 1. Color -coded state clust ers 
 
Figure 2. Clause -Level Date Labeling Analysis : State Clusters   5 
legal text improve s performance ) as well as their publ icly 
released pre-trained  models  to improve our analyses .  
 Moreover, the present work considered only policy text 
related to food waste, which is an important arena in the cli-
mate change discussion (Hall et al., 2009; Quested, Ingle, 
and Parry, 2013 ), but future research may also consider leg-
islative policy that is tied to other areas with a negative en-
vironmental impact. We examined food waste as an initial 
investigation and test of this methodology, and there is clear 
potential for the examination of not only other policy texts 
related to food waste (e.g., liability protection, tax incen-
tives, etc.; Broad Leib et al., 2020) but related to sustainable 
fishing (Worm et al., 2006)  and energy use (Hawken, 2017). 
These other areas are of obvious relevanc e to climate change 
and may include legislative policy that is amenable to such 
analysis . 
 Finally, a limitation of the current work is the reliance on 
MSW as a proxy variable of food waste. Despite the likeli-
hood that food waste exhibits significant conve rgence with 
MSW, the limited predictive validity that we found in the 
present work may be due to the MSW variable being  a 
broader  measure that includes non -food related waste. Thus, 
future work may evaluate food waste policies using a more 
proximal or narr owly defined outcome variable. In general, 
careful consideration of an appropriate outcome or indicator 
variable is especially important in empirical evaluations of 
legislative policy.  
References  
Bradford, R. 2008. An empirical study of required dimen-
sionality for large -scale latent semantic indexing applica-
tions. CIKM '08 : 153 -162.   
Broad Leib, B.; Rice, C.; Neff, R.; Spiker, M.; Schklair, A.; 
and Greenberg, S. 2016. Consumer Perceptions of Date La-
bels: National Survey.  Safety , 23(54): 1 -4. 
Broad Leib, E., and Pollans, M. J. 2019. The New Food 
Safety. California Law Review, 107: 1173 -1248.  
Broad Leib, E. ; Ardura, A. ; Fink, B. ; Hartman, M. ; Giguere, 
M.; and Spiegler, R. 2020. United States Legal Guide: Food 
Donation Law and Policy.  The Harvard  Law School Food 
Law and Policy Clinic: Cambridge, MA, USA . Retrieved 
from: https://chlpi.org/wp -content/uploads/2013/12/USA -
Legal -Guide -2020.pdf  
Busetti, S. 2019. A Theory -Based Evaluation of Food Waste 
policy: Evidence from Italy.  Food Policy , 88: 101749 . 
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2019.101749.  
Chalkidis, I.; Fergadiotis,  M.; Malakasiotis, P.; Aletras , N.; 
and Androutsopoulos , I. 2020.  LEGAL -BERT: The Mup-
pets straight out of Law School. In Findings of Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2020)  
https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings -emnlp.261  Evans, A. I.; and Nagele, R. M. 2018. A Lot to Digest: Ad-
vancing Food Waste Policy in the United States.  Natural 
Resou rces Journal , 58(1): 177 -214. jstor.org/sta-
ble/26394778.  
Hall, K. D.; Guo, J.; Dore, M.; and Chow, C. C. 2009. The 
Progressive Increase of Food Waste in America and Its En-
vironmental Impact.  PloS one , 4(11): e7940. 
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0007940.  
Haw ken, P. 2017. Drawdown: The Most Comprehensive 
Plan Ever Proposed to Reverse Global Warming.  New 
York: Penguin Books.  
Lipinski, B.; Hanson, C.; Waite, R.; Searchinger, T.; and Lo-
max, J. 2013. Reducing Food Loss and Waste.  Washington: 
World Resources Instit ute. 
Pennington, J.; Socher, R.; and Manning, C. D. 20 14. 
GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation . Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP) . Association for Com-
putational Linguistics .  
Povich, E. S. 2019. Food Waste is a Major Problem. Con-
fusing Date Labels are Making It Worse. Stateline . 
Quested, T.; Ingle, R.; and Parry, A. 2013. Household Food 
and Drink Waste in the United Kingdom 2012.  Banbury: 
WRAP.  
Short, J. C.; McKenny, A. F.; and Reid, S. W . 2018. More 
than Words? Computer -Aided Text Analysis in Organiza-
tional Behavior and Psychology Research.  Annual Review 
of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behav-
ior, 5: 415 -435. doi.org/10.1146/annurev -orgpsych -
032117 -104622.  
U.S. Environmental  Protection Agency. 2022. Greenhouse 
Gas Reporting Program . Retrieved from 
https://www.epa.gov/ghgreporting.  
Wilkerson, J.; Smith, D.; and Stramp, N. 2015. Tracing the 
Flow of Policy Ideas in Legislatures: A Text Reuse Ap-
proach.  American Journal of Politic al Science , 59(4): 943 -
956. doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12175.  
Worm, B. ; Barbier, E. B. ; Beaumont, N. ; Duffy, J. E. ; Folke, 
C.; Halpern, B. S. ; ... and Watson, R. 2006. Impacts of Bio-
diversity Loss on Ocean Ecosystem Services.  Sci-
ence, 314(5800) : 787-790. doi.org/10.1126/sci-
ence.1132294  
Acknowledgments  
This research was funded by the MITRE Independent Re-
search and Development  Program.  
 
The authors thank Charles A. Worrell for his constructive 
feedback on earlier drafts of this paper.  