Climate Change 2007
Synthesis Report
Edited by
The Core Writing Team               Rajendra K. Pachauri                          Andy Reisinger
       Synthesis Report                                       Chairman                            Head, Technical Support Unit               IPCC                                                    IPCC                                   Synthesis Report,  IPCC
Core Writing Team
Lenny Bernstein, Peter Bosch, Osvaldo Canziani, Zhenlin Chen, Renate Christ, Ogunlade Davidson,
William Hare, Saleemul Huq, David Karoly, Vladimir Kattsov, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Jian Liu, Ulrike
Lohmann, Martin Manning, Taroh Matsuno, Bettina Menne, Bert Metz, Monirul Mirza, Neville Nicholls,
Leonard Nurse, Rajendra Pachauri, Jean Palutikof, Martin Parry, Dahe Qin, Nijavalli Ravindranath,Andy Reisinger, Jiawen Ren, Keywan Riahi, Cynthia Rosenzweig, Matilde Rusticucci, Stephen Sch-
neider, Youba Sokona, Susan Solomon, Peter Stott, Ronald Stouffer, Taishi Sugiyama, Rob Swart,
Dennis Tirpak, Coleen V ogel, Gary Yohe
Published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate ChangeReferencing this report
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  [Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K and Reisinger, A.
(eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 104 pp.Technical Support Unit for the Synthesis Report:
Andy Reisinger, Richard Nottage, Prima MadanPUBLISHED BY THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE
© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2008
First published 2008
ISBN 92-9169-122-4The right of publication in print, electronic and any other form and in any language is reserved by the IPCC. Short extracts
from this publication may be reproduced without authorization provided that complete source is clearly indicated. Edito-rial correspondence and requests to publish, reproduce or translate articles in part or in whole should be addressed to:
IPCC
c/o World Meteorological Organization (WMO)7bis avenue de la Paix                        Tel. : +41 22 730 8208P.O Box No. 2300                               Fax.: +41 22 730 8025CH- 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland       E-mail: IPCC-Sec@wmo.int
The presentation of material and designations employed in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the IPCC concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, o r
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The mention of specific companies or products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IPCC in prefer-
ence to others of a similar nature which are not mentioned or advertised.
Typeface  Times New Roman  9.5/11.5. System  Adobe PageMaker 6.5
Layout and Graphics Design Support: TERI PressPrinted in Sweden
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was joint recipient of the 2007
Nobel Peace Prize
© The Nobel Foundation. Nobel Prize® and the Nobel Prize® medal design are registered trademarks of the Nobel FoundationThe Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was
jointly established in 1988, by the World Meteorological Or-ganization (WMO) and the United Nations EnvironmentProgramme (UNEP), with the mandate to assess scientific in-formation related to climate change, to evaluate the environ-
mental and socio-economic consequences of climate change,
and to formulate realistic response strategies. The IPCCmultivolume assessments have since then played a major rolein assisting governments to adopt and implement policies inresponse to climate change, and in particular have respondedto the need for authoritative advice of the Conference of the
Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which was established in1992, and its 1997 Kyoto Protocol.
Since its establishment, the IPCC has produced a series of
Assessment Reports (1990, 1995, 2001 and this one in 2007),Special Reports, Technical Papers and Methodology Reports,
which have become standard works of reference, widely used
by policymakers, scientists, other experts and students. Themost recent publications include a Special Report on “Car-bon Dioxide Capture and Storage” and one on “Safeguardingthe Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System”, publishedin 2005, and the “Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas
Inventories” re-edited in 2006. A Technical Paper on “Cli-
mate Change and Water” is under preparation.
This Synthesis Report (SYR), adopted in Valencia, Spain, on
17 November 2007, completes the four-volume Fourth As-sessment Report (AR4), which was released in various stepsthroughout the year under the title “Climate Change 2007”. It
summarises the findings of the three Working Group reports
and provides a synthesis that specifically addresses the issuesof concern to policymakers in the domain of climate change:it confirms that climate change is occurring now, mostly as aresult of human activities; it illustrates the impacts of globalwarming already under way and to be expected in future, and
describes the potential for adaptation of society to reduce its
vulnerability; finally it presents an analysis of costs, policiesand technologies intended to limit the extent of future changesin the climate system.
The AR4 is a remarkable achievement involving more than
500 Lead Authors and 2000 Expert Reviewers, building on
the work of a wide scientific community and submitted to the
scrutiny of delegates from more than one hundred participat-ing nations. It is the result of the enthusiasm, dedication, andcooperation of experts from many different but related disci-
plines. We would like to express our gratitude to all of them,to the Members of the IPCC Bureau, to the staff of the Tech-nical Support Units, particularly of the Technical Support Unitfor the IPCC Synthesis Report in The Energy and Resources
Institute (TERI) in Delhi, to Dr Renate Christ, Secretary of
the IPCC, and to the Secretariat staff.
We acknowledge with gratitude the governments and
organisations that contribute to the IPCC Trust Fund and pro-vide support to experts in different ways. The IPCC has beenespecially successful in engaging in its work a large number
of experts from the developing countries and countries with
economies in transition; the Trust Fund enables extending fi-nancial assistance for their travel to IPCC meetings. We alsoacknowledge the cooperative spirit in which all governmentdelegates have worked together in the IPCC Sessions to reacha meaningful and powerful consensus.
Finally, we would like to thank the Chairman of the IPCC,
Dr Rajendra K. Pachauri, for leading tirelessly and with dedi-cation the effort of all. This is particularly appropriate at thistime as the IPCC as a whole, under his guidance, has beenawarded the 2007 Nobel Peace Price.
We would also like at this occasion to express deep recogni-
tion and sorrow in remembrance of Prof. Bert Bolin, who led
the way twenty years ago as first Chairman of IPCC, and whosadly passed away on 30 December 2007 after a brilliant ca-reer in meteorology and climate science.
Michel Jarraud
Secretary GeneralWorld Meteorological Organization
Achim Steiner
Executive Director
United Nations Environmental ProgrammeForeword
iiiThis Synthesis Report with its Summary for Policymakers is
the fourth and final part of the Fourth Assessment Report(AR4) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change(IPCC) – “Climate Change 2007”. It draws together and inte-grates for the benefit of policy makers and those from others
professions, up to date policy-relevant scientific, technical and
socio-economic information on climate change. This report isintended to assist governments and other decision-makers inthe public and private sector in formulating and implement-ing appropriate responses to the threat of human-induced cli-mate change.
The scope of the Synthesis Report includes the information
contained in the three Working Group contributions to theIPCC AR4, the Working Group I report on “The Physical Sci-ence Basis”, the Working Group II report on “Impacts, Adap-tation and Vulnerability” and the Working Group III report on“Mitigation of Climate Change”. It also draws on other IPCC
reports, in particular recently published IPCC Special Reports.
The Synthesis Report was written by a team dedicated to thistask drawn from the authors of each Working Group report ofthe AR4 led by the Chair of the IPCC. As instructed by thePanel, the authors prepared the draft in a non-technical stylewhile ensuring that scientific and technical facts are recorded
correctly.
The Synthesis Report addresses a range of broad policy-rel-
evant questions, structured around 6 topic headings agreed bythe Panel, and it gives careful attention to cross-cutting themes.It consists of two parts, a Summary for Policymakers (SPM)and a longer report. The sections of the SPM follow largely
the topic structure of the longer report, but for brevity and
clarity, certain issues covered in more than one topic aresummarised in one section of the SPM.
Topic 1  brings together information from Working Groups I
and II on observed changes in climate and the effects of pastclimate change on natural systems and human society.
Topic 2  addresses causes of change, considering both natural
and anthropogenic drivers of climate change. It analyses thechain including greenhouse gas emissions and concentrations,to radiative forcing and resultant climate change, and evalu-ates whether observed changes in climate and in physical andbiological systems can be attributed to natural or anthropo-
genic causes. In providing that information it draws on infor-
mation contained in all three Working Group contributions tothe AR4.
Topic 3  presents information from the three Working Group
reports on projected future climate change and its impacts. Itprovides updated information on emissions scenarios and pro-Preface
jected future changes in climate in the 21st century and be-
yond, and describes the projected impacts of future climatechange on systems, sectors and regions. Special attention isgiven to issues of human well-being and development.
Topic 4  describes adaptation and mitigation options and re-
sponses as assessed in the reports of Working Groups II and
III, and the inter-relationship of climate change and responsemeasures with sustainable development. The focus of this topicis on response measures that can be implemented by 2030.Technologies, policies, measures and instruments as well asbarriers to implementation are addressed along with syner-
gies and trade-offs.
Topic 5  covers the long-term perspective and analyses scien-
tific, technical and socio-economic aspects relevant to adap-tation and mitigation, consistent with the objectives and pro-visions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Cli-mate Change (UNFCCC). It places decision-making about
climate change in a risk management perspective, paying at-
tention to broader environmental and integration issues. Thetopic describes emissions trajectories for stabilisation of green-house gas concentrations at various levels and associated tem-perature increases, along with information about the costs ofmitigation, required technology development and deployment,
and avoided climate impacts. It also explores in detail five
main reasons for concern regarding climate change, which itfinds have become stronger due to new knowledge since theTAR.
Topic 6  highlights robust findings and key uncertainties.
While the Synthesis Report is a largely self-contained docu-
ment, it needs to be viewed in the context of the other vol-
umes of “Climate Change 2007” and it is recommended thatfor further details the contributions of the three WorkingGroups be consulted. Each of the Working Group reports con-sists of a series of chapters which contain a detailed scientifictechnical assessment, a Technical Summary, and a Summary
for Policymakers that has been approved by the IPCC line by
line.
The longer Synthesis Report contains extensive references to
the relevant chapters in the Working Group contributions tothe AR4 and other relevant IPCC reports. For easy reading,references in the Summary for Policymakers only lead to the
relevant sections of the longer Synthesis Report. The CD RoM
included in this report contains the full text of the three Work-ing Group contributions to the AR4 in English, as well as theSummaries for Policymakers and Technical Summaries andthe Synthesis Report in all official UN languages. Referencesin these electronic versions are provided as hyperlinks to en-
vable the reader to easily find further scientific, technical and
socio-economic information. A user guide, glossary of terms,
and lists of acronyms, authors, Review Editors and Expert
Reviewers are provided in the Annexes to this report.
The preparation of the Synthesis Report was carried out in
accordance with the Procedures for the Preparation, Review,Acceptance, Adoption, Approval and Publication of IPCCReports, and it was adopted and approved by the IPCC at its
Twenty Seventh Session (Valencia, Spain, 12-17 November
2007).
We take this opportunity to thank:
the Core Writing Team who drafted this report and, with
their meticulous and painstaking attention to detail,finalised it
the Review Editors who made sure that all comments weretaken into consideration and that consistency with the un-derlying reports was maintained
the members of the Working Groups’ teams of Coordinat-ing Lead Authors and Lead Authors who helped with thedrafting
the Head and staff of the SYR Technical Support Unit,particularly Dr Andy Reisinger, and the Technical SupportUnits of the three Working Groups, for logistical and edi-torial support
the staff of the IPCC Secretariat for innumerable tasks per-formed in support of the preparation, release and publica-
tion of the reportWMO and UNEP for supporting the IPCC Secretariat and
for financial contributions to the IPCC Trust Fund
all member governments and the UNFCCC for their con-tributions to the IPCC Trust Fund
and all member governments and participatingorganisations for invaluable in-kind contributions, includ-ing through supporting experts involved in the IPCC pro-cess and hosting meetings and sessions of the IPCC.
Dr. R.K Pachauri
Chairman of the IPCC
Dr. Renate Christ
Secretary of the IPCC
viContents
Foreword iii
Preface v
Summary for Policymakers 1Synthesis Report 23
Introduction 25
Topic 1 29
Topic 2 35
Topic 3 43
Topic 4 55
Topic 5 63
Topic 6 71
Annexes
I. User guide and access to more detailed information 75
II. Glossary 76
III.Acronyms, chemical symbols; scientific units; country groupings 90
IV. List of authors 92
V. List of Reviewers and Review Editors 94
VI. Index 100
VII. List of Publications by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 102Climate Change 2007:
Synthesis ReportSources cited in this Synthesis Report
References for material contained in this report are given in curly brackets { } at the end of each paragraph.
In the Summary for Policymakers , references refer to Sections, Figures, Tables and Boxes in the underlying
Introduction and Topics of this Synthesis Report.
In the Introduction and six Topics  of this Synthesis Report, references refer to the contributions of Working
Groups I, II and III (WGI, WGII and WGIII) to the Fourth Assessment Report and other IPCC Reports on whichthis Synthesis Report is based, or to other Sections of the Synthesis Report itself (SYR).
The following abbreviations have been used:
SPM: Summary for PolicymakersTS: Technical SummaryES: Executive Summary of a ChapterNumbers denote the specific Chapters and Sections of a report.
For example, {WGI TS.3; WGII 4.ES, Figure 4.3; WGIII Table 11.3} would refer to the Technical Summary
Section 3 of WGI, the Executive Summary and Figure 4.3 in Chapter 4 of WGII, and Table 11.3 in Chapter 11of WGIII.
Other reports cited in this Synthesis Report:
TAR: Third Assessment ReportSROC: Special Report on Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate System