Climate Change 2007:
Synthesis Report
Summary for Policymakers
An Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
This summary, approved in detail at IPCC Plenary XXVII (Valencia, Spain, 12-17 November 2007), represents the
formally agreed statement of the IPCC concerning key findings and uncertainties contained in the Working Group
contributions to the Fourth Assessment Report.
Based on a draft prepared by:
Lenny Bernstein, Peter Bosch, Osvaldo Canziani, Zhenlin Chen, Renate Christ, Ogunlade Davidson, William Hare, Saleemul
Huq, David Karoly, Vladimir Kattsov, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Jian Liu, Ulrike Lohmann, Martin Manning, Taroh Matsuno,Bettina Menne, Bert Metz, Monirul Mirza, Ne ville Nicholls, Leonard Nurse, Rajendra Pachauri, Jean Palutikof, Martin
Parry, Dahe Qin, Nijavalli Ravindranath, Andy Reisinger, Jiawen Ren, Keywan Riahi, Cynthia Rosenzweig, Matilde
Rusticucci, Stephen Schneider, Youba Sokona, Susan Solomon, Peter Stott, Ronald Stouffer, Taishi Sugiyama, Rob Swart,Dennis Tirpak, Coleen Vogel, Gary Y oheSummary for Policymakers
2Introduction
This Synthesis Report is based on the assessment carried
out by the three Working Groups of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). It provides an integratedview of climate change as the final part of the IPCC’s FourthAssessment Report (AR4).
A complete elaboration of the Topics covered in this sum-
mary can be found in this Synthesis Report and in the under-lying reports of the three Working Groups.
1. Observed changes in climate and
their effects
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is
now evident from observations of increases in global
average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melt-
ing of snow and ice and rising global average sea level(Figure SPM.1). 
{1.1}
Eleven of the last twelve years (1995-2006) rank among
the twelve warmest years in the instrumental record of globalsurface temperature (since 1850). The 100-year linear trend
(1906-2005) of 0.74 [0.56 to 0.92]°C
1 is larger than the cor-
responding trend of 0.6 [0.4 to 0.8]°C (1901-2000) given inthe Third Assessment Report (TAR) (Figure SPM.1). The tem-perature increase is widespread over the globe and is greaterat higher northern latitudes. Land regions have warmed fasterthan the oceans (Figures SPM.2, SPM.4). 
{1.1, 1.2}
Rising sea level is consistent with warming (Figure
SPM.1). Global average sea level has risen since 1961 at anaverage rate of 1.8 [1.3 to 2.3] mm/yr and since 1993 at 3.1[2.4 to 3.8] mm/yr, with contributions from thermal expan-sion, melting glaciers and ice caps, and the polar ice sheets.Whether the faster rate for 1993 to 2003 reflects decadal varia-
tion or an increase in the longer-term trend is unclear. 
{1.1}
Observed decreases in snow and ice extent are also con-
sistent with warming (Figure SPM.1). Satellite data since 1978show that annual average Arctic sea ice extent has shrunk by2.7 [2.1 to 3.3]% per decade, with larger decreases in summerof 7.4 [5.0 to 9.8]% per decade. Mountain glaciers and snow
cover on average have declined in both hemispheres. 
{1.1}
From 1900 to 2005, precipitation increased significantly
in eastern parts of North and South America, northern Europeand northern and central Asia but declined in the Sahel, theMediterranean, southern Africa and parts of southern Asia.
Globally, the area affected by drought has likely
2 increased
since the 1970s. {1.1}
It is very likely that over the past 50 years: cold days, cold
nights and frosts have become less frequent over most landareas, and hot days and hot nights have become more frequent.It is likely  that: heat waves have become more frequent over
most land areas, the frequency of heavy precipitation events
has increased over most areas, and since 1975 the incidence
of extreme high sea level
3 has increased worldwide. {1.1}
There is observational evidence of an increase in intense
tropical cyclone activity in the North Atlantic since about 1970,with limited evidence of increases elsewhere. There is no cleartrend in the annual numbers of tropical cyclones. It is difficult
to ascertain longer-term trends in cyclone activity, particularly
prior to 1970. 
{1.1}
Average Northern Hemisphere temperatures during the
second half of the 20th century were very likely  higher than
during any other 50-year period in the last 500 years and likely
the highest in at least the past 1300 years. {1.1}
Observational evidence4 from all continents and most
oceans shows that many natural systems are beingaffected by regional climate changes, particularly tem-perature increases. 
{1.2}
Changes in snow, ice and frozen ground have with high con-
fidence  increased the number and size of glacial lakes, increased
ground instability in mountain and other permafrost regions and
led to changes in some Arctic and Antarctic ecosystems. {1.2}
There is high confidence  that some hydrological systems
have also been affected through increased runoff and earlierspring peak discharge in many glacier- and snow-fed riversand through effects on thermal structure and water quality of
warming rivers and lakes. 
{1.2}
In terrestrial ecosystems, earlier timing of spring events
and poleward and upward shifts in plant and animal rangesare with very high confidence  linked to recent warming. In
some marine and freshwater systems, shifts in ranges andchanges in algal, plankton and fish abundance are with high
confidence  associated with rising water temperatures, as well
as related changes in ice cover, salinity, oxygen levels andcirculation. 
{1.2}
Of the more than 29,000 observational data series, from
75 studies, that show significant change in many physical andbiological systems, more than 89% are consistent with the
direction of change expected as a response to warming (Fig-
1Numbers in square brackets indicate a 90% uncertainty interval around a best estimate, i.e. there is an estimated 5% likelihood  that the value
could be above the range given in square brackets and 5% likelihood that the value could be belo w that range . Uncertainty inter vals are not
necessarily symmetric around the corresponding best estimate.
2Words in italics represent calibrated expressions of uncertainty and confidence. Relevant terms are explained in the Box ‘Treat ment of uncer-
tainty’ in the Introduction of this Synthesis Report.
3Excluding tsunamis, which are not due to climate change. Extreme high sea level depends on average sea level and on regional we ather
systems. It is defined here as the highest 1% of hourly values of observed sea level at a station for a given reference period.
4Based largely on data sets that cover the period since 1970.3Summary for Policymakers
(a) Global average surface temperature
(b) Global average sea level
(c) Northern Hemisphere snow cover
Figure SPM.1.  Observed changes in (a) global average surface temperature; (b) global average sea level from tide gauge (blue) and satellite
(red) data and (c) Northern Hemisphere snow cover for March-April. All differences are relative to corresponding averages for t he period 1961-
1990. Smoothed curves represent decadal averaged values while circles show yearly values. The shaded areas are the uncertainty intervals
estimated from a comprehensive analysis of known uncertainties (a and b) and from the time series (c). {Figure 1.1}Changes in temperature, sea level and Northern Hemisphere snow cover
ure SPM.2). However, there is a notable lack of geographic
balance in data and literature on observed changes, withmarked scarcity in developing countries. 
{1.2, 1.3}
There is medium confidence  that other effects of re-
gional climate change on natural and human environ-
ments are emerging, although many are difficult to dis-cern due to adaptation and non-climatic drivers. 
{1.2}
They include effects of temperature increases on: {1.2}
/circle6agricultural and forestry management at Northern Hemi-
sphere higher latitudes, such as earlier spring planting ofcrops, and alterations in disturbance regimes of forests
due to fires and pests
/circle6some aspects of human health, such as heat-related mor-
tality in Europe, changes in infectious disease vectors insome areas, and allergenic pollen in Northern Hemispherehigh and mid-latitudes
/circle6some human activities in the Arctic (e.g. hunting and travel
over snow and ice) and in lower-elevation alpine areas
(such as mountain sports).Summary for Policymakers
4Changes in physical and biological systems and surface temperature 1970-2004
Figure SPM.2.  Locations of significant changes in data series of physical systems (snow, ice and frozen ground; hydrology; and coastal pro-
cesses) and biological systems (terrestrial, marine and freshwater biological systems), are shown together with surface air tem perature changes
over the period 1970-2004. A subset of about 29,000 data series was selected from about 80,000 data series from 577 studies. Th ese met the
following criteria: (1) ending in 1990 or later; (2) spanning a period of at least 20 years; and (3) showing a significant chan ge in either direction,
as assessed in individual studies. These data series are from about 75 studies (of which about 70 are new since the TAR) and co ntain about
29,000 data series, of which about 28,000 are from European studies. White areas do not contain sufficient observational climat e data to
estimate a temperature trend. The 2 × 2 boxes show the total number of data series with significant changes (top row) and the p ercentage of
those consistent with warming (bottom row) for (i) continental regions: North America (NAM), Latin America (LA), Europe (EUR), Africa (AFR),
Asia (AS), Australia and New Zealand (ANZ), and Polar Regions (PR) and (ii) global-scale: Terrestrial (TER), Marine and Freshwa ter (MFW), and
Global (GLO). The numbers of studies from the seven regional boxes (NAM, EUR, AFR, AS, ANZ, PR) do not add up to the global (GL O) totals
because numbers from regions except Polar do not include the numbers related to Marine and Freshwater (MFW) systems. Locations of large-
area marine changes are not shown on the map. {Figure 1.2}
Physical          Biological
Number of
significantobservedchangesNumber of
significantobservedchangesObserved data series
Physical systems (snow, ice and frozen ground; hydrology; coastal processes)
Biological systems (terrestrial, marine, and freshwater)
,
,,Percentage
of significantchanges consistent with warmingPercentage
of significantchanges consistent with warming89% 94% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 99% 100% 98% 96% 91% 94% 94% 90% 90% 92% 94%355 455 53 119NAM LA EUR AFR AS ANZ PR* TER MFW** GLO
5 2 106 8 6 1 85 765 0 120 24 764 528,115 28,586 28,6715Summary for Policymakers
2. Causes of change
Changes in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) and aerosols, land cover and solar radiation al-ter the energy balance of the climate system. {2.2}
Global GHG emissions due to human activities have
grown since pre-industrial times, with an increase of70% between 1970 and 2004 (Figure SPM.3).
5 {2.1}
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the most important anthropogenic
GHG. Its annual emissions grew by about 80% between 1970and 2004. The long-term trend of declining CO
2 emissions
per unit of energy supplied reversed after 2000. {2.1}
Global atmospheric concentrations of CO2, methane
(CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) have increased markedly
as a result of human activities since 1750 and now farexceed pre-industrial values determined from ice coresspanning many thousands of years. 
{2.2}
Atmospheric concentrations of CO2 (379ppm) and CH4
(1774ppb) in 2005 exceed by far the natural range over the
last 650,000 years. Global increases in CO2 concentrationsare due primarily to fossil fuel use, with land-use change pro-
viding another significant but smaller contribution. It is very
likely  that the observed increase in CH4 concentration is pre-
dominantly due to agriculture and fossil fuel use. CH4 growth
rates have declined since the early 1990s, consistent with to-tal emissions (sum of anthropogenic and natural sources) be-ing nearly constant during this period. The increase in N
2O
concentration is primarily due to agriculture. {2.2}
There is very high confidence that the net effect of human
activities since 1750 has been one of warming.6 {2.2}
Most of the observed increase in global average tempera-
tures since the mid-20th century is very likely  due to the
observed increase in anthropogenic GHG concentra-tions.
7 It is likely  that there has been significant anthro-
pogenic warming over the past 50 years averaged overeach continent (except Antarctica) (Figure SPM.4). 
{2.4}
During the past 50 years, the sum of solar and volcanic
forcings would likely  have produced cooling. Observed pat-
terns of warming and their changes are simulated only bymodels that include anthropogenic forcings. Difficulties re-main in simulating and attributing observed temperature
changes at smaller than continental scales. 
{2.4}
Global anthropogenic GHG emissions
Figure SPM.3.  (a) Global annual emissions of anthropogenic GHGs from 1970 to 2004.5 (b) Share of different anthropogenic GHGs in total
emissions in 2004 in terms of carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2-eq). (c) Share of different sectors in total anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2004
in terms of CO2-eq. (Forestry includes deforestation.) {Figure 2.1}F-gasesCO2 from fossil fuel use and other sources
CH4 from agriculture, waste and energyCO2 from deforestation, decay and peat
N2O from agriculture and othersGtCO 2-eq / yr28.735.639.444.749.0
5 Includes only carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and
sulphurhexafluoride (SF6), whose emissions are covered by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). These
GHGs are weighted by their 100-year Global Warming Potentials, using values consistent with reporting under the UNFCCC.
6Increases in GHGs tend to warm the surface while the net effect of increases in aerosols tends to cool it. The net effect due t o human activities
since the pre-industrial era is one of warming (+1.6 [+0.6 to +2.4] W/m2). In comparison, changes in solar irradiance are estimated to have
caused a small warming effect (+0.12 [+0.06 to +0.30] W/m2).
7Consideration of remaining uncertainty is based on current methodologies.Summary for Policymakers
6Figure SPM.4.  Comparison of observed continental- and global-scale changes in surface temperature with results simulated by climate models
using either natural or both natural and anthropogenic forcings. Decadal averages of observations are shown for the period 1906 -2005 (black
line) plotted against the centre of the decade and relative to the corresponding average for the period 1901-1950. Lines are da shed where spatial
coverage is less than 50%. Blue shaded bands show the 5 to 95% range for 19 simulations from five climate models using only the  natural
forcings due to solar activity and volcanoes. Red shaded bands show the 5 to 95% range for 58 simulations from 14 climate model s using both
natural and anthropogenic forcings. {Figure 2.5}Global and continental temperature change
models using only natural forcings
models using both natural and anthropogenic forcingsobservations
Advances since the TAR show that discernible human
influences extend beyond average temperature to other
aspects of climate. {2.4}
Human influences have: {2.4}
/circle6very likely contributed to sea level rise during the latter
half of the 20th century
/circle6likely contributed to changes in wind patterns, affecting
extra-tropical storm tracks and temperature patterns
/circle6likely  increased temperatures of extreme hot nights, cold
nights and cold days
/circle6more likely than not  increased risk of heat waves, area
affected by drought since the 1970s and frequency of heavyprecipitation events.Anthropogenic warming over the last three decades has likely
had a discernible influence at the global scale on observed
changes in many physical and biological systems. {2.4}
Spatial agreement between regions of significant warm-
ing across the globe and locations of significant observedchanges in many systems consistent with warming is very
unlikely  to be due solely to natural variability. Several model-
ling studies have linked some specific responses in physical
and biological systems to anthropogenic warming. 
{2.4}
More complete attribution of observed natural system re-
sponses to anthropogenic warming is currently prevented bythe short time scales of many impact studies, greater naturalclimate variability at regional scales, contributions of non-climate factors and limited spatial coverage of studies. 
{2.4}7Summary for Policymakers
8For an explanation of SRES emissions scenarios, see Box ‘SRES scenarios’ in Topic 3 of this Synthesis Report. These scenarios d o not include
additional climate policies above current ones; more recent studies differ with respect to UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol inclusion.
9Emission pathways of mitigation scenarios are discussed in Section 5.3. Projected climate change
and its impacts
There is high agreement  and much evidence  that with
current climate change mitigation policies and related sus-tainable development practices, global GHG emissionswill continue to grow over the next few decades. 
{3.1}
The IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES,
2000) projects an increase of global GHG emissions by 25 to90% (CO
2-eq) between 2000 and 2030 (Figure SPM.5), with
fossil fuels maintaining their dominant position in the global en-ergy mix to 2030 and beyond. More recent scenarios withoutadditional emissions mitigation are comparable in range.
8,9 {3.1}
Continued GHG emissions at or above current rates
would cause further warming and induce many changesin the global climate system during the 21
st century that
would very likely  be larger than those observed during
the 20th century (Table SPM.1, Figure SPM.5). {3.2.1}For the next two decades a warming of about 0.2°C per de-
cade is projected for a range of SRES emissions scenarios. Even
if the concentrations of all GHGs and aerosols had been kept
constant at year 2000 levels, a further warming of about 0.1°Cper decade would be expected. Afterwards, temperature projec-tions increasingly depend on specific emissions scenarios. 
{3.2}
The range of projections (Table SPM.1) is broadly con-
sistent with the TAR, but uncertainties and upper ranges for
temperature are larger mainly because the broader range of
available models suggests stronger climate-carbon cycle feed-backs. Warming reduces terrestrial and ocean uptake of atmo-spheric CO
2, increasing the fraction of anthropogenic emis-
sions remaining in the atmosphere. The strength of this feed-back effect varies markedly among models. 
{2.3, 3.2.1}
Because understanding of some important effects driving
sea level rise is too limited, this report does not assess thelikelihood, nor provide a best estimate or an upper bound forsea level rise. Table SPM.1 shows model-based projections
Scenarios for GHG emissions from 2000 to 2100 (in the absence of additional climate policies)
and projections of surface temperatures
Figure SPM.5.  Left Panel: Global GHG emissions (in GtCO2-eq) in the absence of climate policies: six illustrative SRES marker scenarios
(coloured lines) and the 80th percentile range of recent scenarios published since SRES (post-SRES) (gray shaded area). Dashed lines show the
full range of post-SRES scenarios. The emissions include CO2, CH4, N2O and F-gases. Right Panel:  Solid lines are m ulti-model global av erages
of surface warming for scenarios A2, A1B and B1, shown as continuations of the 20th-century simulations. These projections also take into
account emissions of short-lived GHGs and aerosols. The pink line is not a scenario, but is for Atmosphere-Ocean General Circul ation Model
(AOGCM) simulations where atmospheric concentrations are held constant at year 2000 values. The bars at the right of the figure  indicate the
best estimate (solid line within each bar) and the likely range assessed for the six SRES marker scenarios at 2090-2099. All temperatures are
relative to the period 1980-1999. {Figures 3.1 and 3.2}A1BB1
A2B2Global GHG emissions (GtCO 2-eq / yr)
Global surface warming (oC)
Y ear 2000 constant
concentrationspost-SRES (max)
post-SRES (min)post-SRES range (80%)
A1FIA1T
20   centuryth
2000                                   2100                 1900                                    2000                                    2100
Y ear                                                                        Y earSummary for Policymakers
810TAR projections were made for 2100, whereas the projections for this report are for 2090-2099. The TAR would have had similar r anges to
those in Table SPM.1 if it had treated uncertainties in the same way.
11For discussion of the longer term, see material below.of global average sea level rise for 2090-2099.10 The projec-
tions do not include uncertainties in climate-carbon cycle feed-
backs nor the full effects of changes in ice sheet flow, there-
fore the upper values of the ranges are not to be consideredupper bounds for sea level rise. They include a contributionfrom increased Greenland and Antarctic ice flow at the ratesobserved for 1993-2003, but this could increase or decreasein the future.
11 {3.2.1}
There is now higher confidence than in the TAR in pro-
jected patterns of warming and other regional-scalefeatures, including changes in wind patterns, precipi-tation and some aspects of extremes and sea ice. 
{3.2.2}
Regional-scale changes include: {3.2.2}
/circle6warming greatest over land and at most high northern lati-
tudes and least over Southern Ocean and parts of the North
Atlantic Ocean, continuing recent observed trends (Fig-ure SPM.6)
/circle6contraction of snow cover area, increases in thaw depth
over most permafrost regions and decrease in sea ice ex-tent; in some projections using SRES scenarios, Arctic
late-summer sea ice disappears almost entirely by the lat-
ter part of the 21
st century
/circle6very likely increase in frequency of hot extremes, heat
waves and heavy precipitation
/circle6likely  increase in tropical cyclone intensity; less confidence
in global decrease of tropical cyclone numbers/circle6poleward shift of extra-tropical storm tracks with conse-
quent changes in wind, precipitation and temperature pat-
terns
/circle6very likely precipitation increases in high latitudes and
likely  decreases in most subtropical land regions, continu-
ing observed recent trends.
There is high confidence  that by mid-century, annual river
runoff and water availability are projected to increase at high
latitudes (and in some tropical wet areas) and decrease in somedry regions in the mid-latitudes and tropics. There is also high
confidence  that many semi-arid areas (e.g. Mediterranean
Basin, western United States, southern Africa andnorth-eastern Brazil) will suffer a decrease in water resources
due to climate change. 
{3.3.1, Figure 3.5}
Studies since the TAR have enabled more systematic
understanding of the timing and magnitude of impactsrelated to differing amounts and rates of climatechange. 
{3.3.1, 3.3.2}
Figure SPM.7 presents examples of this new information
for systems and sectors. The top panel shows impacts increas-
ing with increasing temperature change. Their estimated mag-nitude and timing is also affected by development pathway(lower panel). 
{3.3.1}
Examples of some projected impacts for different regions
are given in Table SPM.2.Table SPM.1.  Projected global average surface warming and sea level rise at the end of the 21st century. {Table 3.1}
Temperature change Sea level rise
(°C at 2090-2099 relative to 1980-1999) a, d(m at 2090-2099 relative to 1980-1999)
Case Best estimate Likely  range Model-based range
excluding future rapid dynamical changes in ice flow
Constant year 2000
concentrationsb0.6 0.3 – 0.9 Not available
B1 scenario 1.8 1.1 – 2.9 0.18 – 0.38
A1T scenario 2.4 1.4 – 3.8 0.20 – 0.45
B2 scenario 2.4 1.4 – 3.8 0.20 – 0.43
A1B scenario 2.8 1.7 – 4.4 0.21 – 0.48A2 scenario 3.4 2.0 – 5.4 0.23 – 0.51
A1FI scenario 4.0 2.4 – 6.4 0.26 – 0.59
Notes:
a) Temperatures are assessed best estimates and likely  uncertainty ranges from a hierarchy of models of varying complexity as well as
observational constraints.
b) Y ear 2000 constant composition is derived from Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation Models (AOGCMs) only.
c) All scenarios above are six SRES marker scenarios. Approximate CO2-eq concentrations corresponding to the computed radiative
forcing due to anthropogenic GHGs and aerosols in 2100 (see p. 823 of the Working Group I TAR) for the SRES B1, AIT, B2, A1B, A 2
and A1FI illustrative marker scenarios are about 600, 700, 800, 850, 1250 and 1550ppm, respectively.
d) Temperature changes are expressed as the difference from the period 1980-1999. To express the change relative to the period 1 850-
1899 add 0.5°C.9Summary for Policymakers
Geographical pattern of surface warming
Figure SPM.6.  Projected surface temperature changes for the late 21st century (2090-2099). The map shows the multi-AOGCM average projec-
tion for the A1B SRES scenario. Temperatures are relative to the period 1980-1999. {Figure 3.2}
Some systems, sectors and regions are likely to be espe-
cially affected by climate change.12 {3.3.3}
Systems and sectors: {3.3.3}
/circle6particular ecosystems:
- terrestrial: tundra, boreal forest and mountain regions
because of sensitivity to warming; mediterranean-typeecosystems because of reduction in rainfall; and tropi-cal rainforests where precipitation declines
- coastal: mangroves and salt marshes, due to multiple
stresses
- marine: coral reefs due to multiple stresses; the sea ice
biome because of sensitivity to warming
/circle6water resources in some dry regions at mid-latitudes13 and
in the dry tropics, due to changes in rainfall and evapo-
transpiration, and in areas dependent on snow and ice melt
/circle6agriculture in low latitudes, due to reduced water avail-
ability
/circle6low-lying coastal systems, due to threat of sea level rise
and increased risk from extreme weather events
/circle6human health in populations with low adaptive capacity.
Regions: {3.3.3}
/circle6the Arctic, because of the impacts of high rates of projected
warming on natural systems and human communities/circle6Africa, because of low adaptive capacity and projected
climate change impacts
/circle6small islands, where there is high exposure of population
and infrastructure to projected climate change impacts
/circle6Asian and African megadeltas, due to large populations
and high exposure to sea level rise, storm surges and riverflooding.
Within other areas, even those with high incomes, some
people (such as the poor, young children and the elderly) can
be particularly at risk, and also some areas and some activi-ties. 
{3.3.3}
Ocean acidification
The uptake of anthropogenic carbon since 1750 has led to
the ocean becoming more acidic with an average decrease in
pH of 0.1 units. Increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations
lead to further acidification. Projections based on SRES sce-narios give a reduction in average global surface ocean pH ofbetween 0.14 and 0.35 units over the 21
st century. While the ef-
fects of observed ocean acidification on the marine biosphere areas yet undocumented, the progressive acidification of oceans is
expected to have negative impacts on marine shell-forming or-
ganisms (e.g. corals) and their dependent species. 
{3.3.4}
12Identified on the basis of expert judgement of the assessed literature and considering the magnitude, timing and projected rate  of climate
change, sensitivity and adaptive capacity.
13Including arid and semi-arid regions.Summary for Policymakers
10Examples of impacts associated with global average temperature change
(Impacts will vary by extent of adaptation, rate of temperature change and socio-economic pathway)
Figure SPM.7.  Examples of impacts associated with projected global average surface warming. Upper panel:  Illustrative examples of global
impacts projected for climate changes (and sea level and atmospheric CO2 where relevant) associated with different amounts of increase in
global average surface temperature in the 21st century. The black lines link impacts; broken-line arrows indicate impacts continuing with increas-
ing temperature. Entries are placed so that the left-hand side of text indicates the approximate level of warming that is assoc iated with the onset
of a given impact. Quantitative entries for water scarcity and flooding represent the additional impacts of climate change rela tive to the conditions
projected across the range of SRES scenarios A1FI, A2, B1 and B2. Adaptation to climate change is not included in these estimat ions. Confi-
dence levels for all statements are high. Lower panel:  Dots and bars indicate the best estimate and likely  ranges of warming assessed for the
six SRES marker scenarios for 2090-2099 relative to 1980-1999. {Figure 3.6}Warming by 2090-2099 relative to 1980-1999 for non-mitigation scenarios
6.4°C
5.4°C0 1 2 3 4 5 °CGlobal average annual temperature change relative to 1980-1999 (°C)
5 °C 0 1234About 30% of 
global coastal 
wetlands lost‡Increased water availability in moist tropics and high latitudes
Decreasing water availability and increasing drought in mid-latitudes and semi-arid low latitudes
Hundreds of millions of people exposed to increased water stress
Up to 30% of species at 
increasing risk of extinction
Increased coral bleaching            Most corals bleached                  Widespread coral mortality
Increasing species range shifts and wildfire riskTerrestrial biosphere tends toward a net carbon source as:
~15%                                                          ~40% of ecosystems affected                 
Tendencies for cereal productivity
to decrease in low latitudesProductivity of all cereals 
decreases in low latitudes
Cereal productivity to
decrease in some regionsComplex, localised negative impacts on small holders, subsistence farmers and fishers
Tendencies for some cereal productivity 
to increase at mid- to high latitudes Significant† extinctions 
around the globe
Changed distribution of some disease vectorsIncreasing burden from malnutrition, diarrhoeal, cardio-respiratory and infectious diseases
Increased morbidity and mortality from heat waves, floods and droughts
Substantial burden on health servicesEcosystem changes due to weakening of the meridional 
overturning circulation
Millions more people could experience coastal flooding each yearIncreased damage from floods and stormsWATER
ECOSYSTEMS
FOOD
COASTS
HEALTH
5 °C 0 1234† Significant is defined here as more than 40%.      ‡ Based on average rate of sea level rise of 4.2mm/year from 2000 to 2080.11Summary for Policymakers
Table SPM.2.  Examples of some projected regional impacts. {3.3.2}
Africa /circle6By 2020, between 75 and 250 million of people are projected to be exposed to increased water stress due to
climate change.
/circle6By 2020, in some countries, yields from rain-fed agr iculture could be reduced by up to 50%. Agricultural
production, including access to food, in many African countries is projected to be severely compromised. This
would further adversely affect food security and exacerbate malnutrition.
/circle6Towards the end of the 21st century, projected sea level rise will affect low-lying coastal areas with large
populations. The cost of adaptation could amount to at least 5 to 10% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
/circle6By 2080, an increase of 5 to 8% of arid and semi-arid land in Africa is projected under a range of climatescenarios (TS).
Asia /circle6By the 2050s, freshwater availability in Central, South, East and South-East Asia, particularly in large riverbasins, is projected to decrease.
/circle6Coastal areas, especially heavily populated megadelta regions in South, East and South-East Asia, will be at
greatest risk due to increased flooding from the sea and, in some megadeltas, flooding from the rivers.
/circle6Climate change is projected to compound the pressures on natural resources and the environment
associated with rapid urbanisation, industrialisation and economic development.
/circle6Endemic morbidity and mortality due to diarrhoeal disease primarily associated with floods and droughtsare expected to rise in East, South and South-East Asia due to projected changes in the hydrological cycle.
Australia and /circle6By 2020, significant loss of biodiversity is projected to occur in some ecologically rich sites, including the
New Zealand Great Barrier Reef and Queensland Wet Tropics.
/circle6By 2030, water security problems are projected to intensify in southern and eastern Australia and, in
New Zealand, in Northland and some eastern regions.
/circle6By 2030, production from agriculture and forestry is projected to decline over much of southern and
eastern Australia, and over parts of eastern New Zealand, due to increased drought and fire. However, in
New Zealand, initial benefits are projected in some other regions.
/circle6By 2050, ongoing coastal development and population growth in some areas of Australia and New Zealand
are projected to exacerbate risks from sea level rise and increases in the severity and frequency of storms
and coastal flooding.
Europe /circle6Climate change is expected to magnify regional differences in Europe’s natural resources and assets.
Negative impacts will include increased risk of inland flash floods and more frequent coastal flooding and
increased erosion (due to storminess and sea level rise).
/circle6Mountainous areas will face glacier retreat, reduced snow cover and winter tourism, and extensive species
losses (in some areas up to 60% under high emissions scenarios by 2080).
/circle6In southern Europe, climate change is projected to worsen conditions (high temperatures and drought) ina region already vulnerable to climate variability, and to reduce water availability, hydropower potential,summer tourism and, in general, crop productivity.
/circle6Climate change is also projected to increase the health risks due to heat waves and the frequency of wildfires.
Latin America /circle6By mid-century, increases in temperature and associated decreases in soil water are projected to lead to
gradual replacement of tropical forest by savanna in eastern Amazonia. Semi-arid vegetation will tend to
be replaced by arid-land vegetation.
/circle6There is a risk of significant biodiversity loss through species extinction in many areas of tropical Latin America.
/circle6Productivity of some important crops is projected to decrease and livestock productivity to decline, withadverse consequences for food security. In temperate zones, soybean yields are projected to increase.Overall, the number of people at risk of hunger is projected to increase (TS; 
medium confidence ).
/circle6Changes in precipitation patterns and the disappearance of glaciers are projected to significantly affectwater availability for human consumption, agriculture and energy generation.
North America /circle6Warming in western mountains is projected to cause decreased snowpack, more winter flooding andreduced summer flows, exacerbating competition for over-allocated water resources.
/circle6In the early decades of the century, moderate climate change is projected to increase aggregate yields of
rain-fed agriculture by 5 to 20%, but with important variability among regions. Major challenges are
projected for crops that are near the warm end of their suitable range or which depend on highly utilisedwater resources.
/circle6Cities that currently experience heat waves are expected to be further challenged by an increasednumber, intensity and duration of heat waves during the course of the century, with potential for adversehealth impacts.
/circle6Coastal communities and habitats will be increasingly stressed by climate change impacts interactingwith development and pollution.
continued...Summary for Policymakers
12Altered frequencies and intensities of extreme weather,
together with sea level rise, are expected to have mostlyadverse effects on natural and human systems. 
{3.3.5}
Examples for selected extremes and sectors are shown in
Table SPM.3.
Anthropogenic warming and sea level rise would con-
tinue for centuries due to the time scales associatedwith climate processes and feedbacks, even if GHGconcentrations were to be stabilised. 
{3.2.3}
Estimated long-term (multi-century) warming correspond-
ing to the six AR4 Working Group III stabilisation categoriesis shown in Figure SPM.8.Contraction of the Greenland ice sheet is projected to con-
tinue to contribute to sea level rise after 2100. Current modelssuggest virtually complete elimination of the Greenland ice
sheet and a resulting contribution to sea level rise of about 7m
if global average warming were sustained for millennia inexcess of 1.9 to 4.6°C relative to pre-industrial values. Thecorresponding future temperatures in Greenland are compa-rable to those inferred for the last interglacial period 125,000years ago, when palaeoclimatic information suggests reductions
of polar land ice extent and 4 to 6m of sea level rise. 
{3.2.3}
Current global model studies project that the Antarctic ice
sheet will remain too cold for widespread surface melting andgain mass due to increased snowfall. However, net loss of icemass could occur if dynamical ice discharge dominates theice sheet mass balance. 
{3.2.3}Table SPM.2.  continued...
Polar Regions /circle6The main projected biophysical effects are reductions in thickness and extent of glaciers, ice sheets
and sea ice, and changes in natural ecosystems with detrimental effects on many organisms includingmigratory birds, mammals and higher predators.
/circle6For human communities in the Arctic, impacts, particularly those resulting from changing snow and iceconditions, are projected to be mixed.
/circle6Detrimental impacts would include those on infrastructure and traditional indigenous ways of life.
/circle6In both polar regions, specific ecosystems and habitats are projected to be vulnerable, as climatic barriers tospecies invasions are lowered.
 Small Islands /circle6Sea level rise is expected to exacerbate inundation, storm surge, erosion and other coastal hazards, thusthreatening vital infrastructure, settlements and facilities that support the livelihood of island communities.
/circle6Deterioration in coastal conditions, for example through erosion of beaches and coral bleaching, is expected
to affect local resources.
/circle6By mid-century, climate change is expected to reduce water resources in many small islands, e.g. in
the Caribbean and Pacific, to the point where the y become insufficient to meet demand during low-rainfall
periods.
/circle6With higher temperatures, increased invasion by non-native species is expected to occur, particularly on
mid- and high-latitude islands.
Note:
Unless stated explicitly, all entries are from Working Group II SPM text, and are either very high confidence  or high confidence  state-
ments, reflecting different sectors (agr iculture, ecosystems, water, coasts, health, industry and settlements). The Working Gro up II SPM
refers to the source of the statements, timelines and temperatures. The magnitude and timing of impacts that will ultimately be  realised
will vary with the amount and rate of climate change, emissions scenarios, development pathways and adaptation.
Figure SPM.8.  Estimated long-term (multi-century) warming corresponding to the six AR4 Working Group III stabilisation categories (Table
SPM.6). The temperature scale has been shifted by -0.5°C compared to Table SPM.6 to account approximately for the warming betwe en pre-
industrial and 1980-1999. For most stabilisation levels global average temperature is approaching the equilibrium level over a few centuries. For
GHG emissions scenarios that lead to stabilisation at levels comparable to SRES B1 and A1B by 2100 (600 and 850ppm CO2-eq; category IV
and V), assessed models project that about 65 to 70% of the estimated global equilibrium temperature increase, assuming a clima te sensitivity
of 3°C, would be realised at the time of stabilisation. For the much lower stabilisation scenarios (category I and II, Figure S PM.11), the equilib-
rium temperature may be reached earlier. {Figure 3.4}Estimated multi-century warming relative to 1980-1999 for AR4 stabilisation categories
   0                          1                          2                           3                          4                           5                         6  °C
Global average temperature change relative to 1980-1999 (°C)13Summary for Policymakers
Table SPM.3.  Examples of possible impacts of climate change due to changes in extreme weather and climate events, based on
projections to the mid- to late 21st century. These do not take into account any changes or developments in adaptive capacity. The
likelihood estimates in column two relate to the phenomena listed in column one . {Table 3.2}
Anthropogenic warming could lead to some impacts
that are abrupt or irreversible, depending upon the rate
and magnitude of the climate change. {3.4}
Partial loss of ice sheets on polar land could imply metres
of sea level rise, major changes in coastlines and inundationof low-lying areas, with greatest effects in river deltas andlow-lying islands. Such changes are projected to occur overmillennial time scales, but more rapid sea level rise on cen-
tury time scales cannot be excluded. 
{3.4}
Climate change is likely  to lead to some irreversible im-
pacts. There is medium confidence  that approximately 20 to
30% of species assessed so far are likely  to be at increased
risk of extinction if increases in global average warming ex-ceed 1.5 to 2.5°C (relative to 1980-1999). As global averagePhenomenona and Likelihood of Examples of major projected impacts by sector
direction of trend future trends
based on Agr iculture, forestry Water resource s Human health Industry, settlement
projections and ecosystems and society
for 21st century
using SRES
scenarios
Over most land Virtually Increased yields in Effects on water Reduced human Reduced energy demand for
areas, warmer and certainbcolder environments; resources relying on mortality from heating; increased demand
fewer cold days decreased yields in snowmelt; effects on decreased cold f or cooling; declining air quality
and nights, warmer war mer environments; some water supplies e xposure in cities; reduced disruption to
and more frequent increased insect tr ansport due to snow, ice;
hot days and nights outbreaks eff ects on winter tourism
Warm spells/heat Very likely Reduced yields in Increased water Increased risk of Reduction in quality of life for
waves. Frequency wa rmer regions demand; water heat-related people in warm areas without
increases over most due to heat stress; quality problems, mortality, especially appropriate housing; impacts
land areas increased danger of e.g. algal blooms for the elderly, on the elderly, very young and
wildfire chronically sick, poor
very young andsocially isolated
Heavy precipitation
Very likely Damage to crops; Adverse effects on Increased risk of Disruption of settlements,
events. Frequency soil erosion, inability quality of surface deaths, injuries and commerce, transport and
increases over most to cultivate land due and groundwater; inf ectious, respiratory societies due to flooding:
areas to waterlogging of contamination of and skin diseases pressures on urban and rural
soils w ater supply; water infrastructures; loss of property
scarcity may berelieved
Area affected by
Likely Land degradation; More widespread Increased risk of W ater shortage for settlements,
drought increases lower yields/crop water stress food and water industry and societies;
damage and failure; shortage; increased reduced hydropower generation
increased livestock r isk of malnutrition; potentials; potential for
deaths; increased increased risk of population migration
risk of wildfire water- and food-
borne diseases
Intense tropical Likely Damage to crops; Power outages Increased risk of Disruption by flood and high
cyclone activity windthrow (uprooting) causing disruption deaths, injur ies, winds; withdrawal of risk
increases of trees; damage to of public water supply water- and food- coverage in vulnerable areas
coral reefs borne diseases; by private insurers; potential
post-traumatic for population migr ations; loss
stress disorders of property
Increased incidence LikelydSalinisation of Decreased fresh- Increased risk of Costs of coastal protection
of extreme high irrigation water, water availability due deaths and injuries versus costs of land-usesea level (excludes estuaries and fresh- to saltwater intrusion by dro wning in floods; relocation; potential for
tsunamis)
cwater systems mig ration-related mov ement of populations and
health effects infrastructure; also see tropical
cyclones above
Notes:
a) See Working Group I Table 3.7 for further details regarding definitions.
b) Warming of the most extreme days and nights each year.
c) Extreme high sea level depends on average sea level and on regional weather systems. It is defined as the highest 1% of hourl y values
of observed sea level at a station for a given reference period.
d) In all scenarios, the projected global average sea level at 2100 is higher than in the reference period. The effect of change s in regional
weather systems on sea level extremes has not been assessed.Summary for Policymakers
14temperature increase exceeds about 3.5°C, model projections
suggest significant extinctions (40 to 70% of species assessed)around the globe. 
{3.4}
Based on current model simulations, the meridional over-
turning circulation (MOC) of the Atlantic Ocean will very likely
slow down during the 21st century; nevertheless temperatures
over the Atlantic and Europe are projected to increase. TheMOC is very unlikely to undergo a large abrupt transition dur-
ing the 21
st century. Longer-term MOC changes cannot be as-
sessed with confidence. Impacts of large-scale and persistentchanges in the MOC are likely  to include changes in marine
ecosystem productivity, fisheries, ocean CO
2 uptake, oceanic
oxygen concentrations and terrestrial vegetation. Changes interrestrial and ocean CO
2 uptake may feed back on the cli-
mate system. {3.4}
4. Adaptation and mitigation options14
A wide array of adaptation options is available, but more
extensive adaptation than is currently occurring is re-quired to reduce vulnerability to climate change. Thereare barriers, limits and costs, which are not fully un-
derstood. 
{4.2}
Societies have a long record of managing the impacts of
weather- and climate-related events. Nevertheless, additionaladaptation measures will be required to reduce the adverseimpacts of projected climate change and variability, regard-less of the scale of mitigation undertaken over the next two to
three decades. Moreover, vulnerability to climate change can
be exacerbated by other stresses. These arise from, for ex-ample, current climate hazards, poverty and unequal access toresources, food insecurity, trends in economic globalisation,conflict and incidence of diseases such as HIV/AIDS. 
{4.2}
Some planned adaptation to climate change is already
occurring on a limited basis. Adaptation can reduce vulner-ability, especially when it is embedded within broader sectoral
initiatives (Table SPM.4). There is high confidence  that there
are viable adaptation options that can be implemented in some
sectors at low cost, and/or with high benefit-cost ratios. How-ever, comprehensive estimates of global costs and benefits ofadaptation are limited. 
{4.2, Table 4.1}
Adaptive capacity is intimately connected to social and
economic development but is unevenly distributed
across and within societies. {4.2}
A range of barriers limits both the implementation and
effectiveness of adaptation measures. The capacity to adapt isdynamic and is influenced by a society’s productive base, in-cluding natural and man-made capital assets, social networksand entitlements, human capital and institutions, governance,
national income, health and technology. Even societies with
high adaptive capacity remain vulnerable to climate change,variability and extremes. 
{4.2}
Both bottom-up and top-down studies indicate that
there is high agreement  and  much evidence  of sub-
stantial economic potential for the mitigation of global
GHG emissions over the coming decades that could
offset the projected growth of global emissions or re-duce emissions below current levels (Figures SPM.9,SPM.10).
15 While top-down and bottom-up studies are
in line at the global level (Figure SPM.9) there are con-siderable differences at the sectoral level. 
{4.3}
No single technology can provide all of the mitigation
potential in any sector. The economic mitigation potential,which is generally greater than the market mitigation poten-tial, can only be achieved when adequate policies are in placeand barriers removed (Table SPM.5). 
{4.3}
Bottom-up studies suggest that mitigation opportunities
with net negative costs have the potential to reduce emissions
by around 6 GtCO2-eq/yr in 2030, realising which requires
dealing with implementation barriers. {4.3}
14While this Section deals with adaptation and mitigation separately, these responses can be complementary. This theme is discuss ed in
Section 5.
15The concept of ‘ mitigation potential ’ has been developed to assess the scale of GHG reductions that could be made, relative to emission
baselines, for a given level of carbon price (expressed in cost per unit of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions avoided or redu ced). Mitigation
potential is further differentiated in terms of ‘market mitigation potential’ and ‘economic mitigation potential’.
Market mitigation potential  is the mitigation potential based on private costs and private discount rates (reflecting the perspective of private
consumers and companies), which might be expected to occur under forecast market conditions, including policies and measures cu rrently in
place, noting that barriers limit actual uptake.
Economic mitigation potential  is the mitigation potential that takes into account social costs and benefits and social discount rates (reflect-
ing the perspective of society; social discount rates are lower than those used by private investors), assuming that market eff iciency is
improved by policies and measures and barriers are removed.
Mitigation potential is estimated using different types of approaches. Bottom-up studies  are based on assessment of mitigation options,
emphasising specific technologies and regulations. They are typically sectoral studies taking the macro-economy as unchanged. Top-down
studies  assess the economy-wide potential of mitigation options. They use globally consistent frameworks and aggregated information abo ut
mitigation options and capture macro-economic and market feedbacks.15Summary for Policymakers
Table SPM.4.  Selected examples of planned adaptation by sector. {Table 4.1}
Adaptation option/strategy
Expanded rainwater harvesting;
water storage and conservationtechniques; water re-use;
desalination; water-use
 and
irrigation efficiency
Adjustment of planting dates and
crop variety; crop relocation;
improved land management, e.g.
erosion control and soil protectionthrough tree planting
Relocation; seawalls and storm
surge barriers; dune reinforce-
ment; land acquisition andcreation of marshlands/wetlands
as buffer against sea level rise
and flooding; protection of existingnatural barriers
Heat-health action plans;
emergency medical services;
improved climate-sensitivedisease surveillance and control;
safe water and improved
sanitation
Diversification of tourism
attractions and revenues; shifting
ski slopes to higher altitudes and
glaciers; artificial snow-making
Ralignment/relocation; design
standards and planning for roads,
rail and other infrastructure to
cope with warming and drainage
Strengthening of overhead
transmission and distributioninfrastructure; underground
cabling for utilities; energy
efficiency; use of renewablesources; reduced dependence on
single sources of energyUnderlying policy framework
National water policies and
integrated water resources manage-ment; water-related hazards
management
R&D policies; institutional reform;
land tenure and land reform; training;
capacity building; crop insurance;
financial incentives, e.g. subsidiesand tax credits
Standards and regulations that
integrate climate change consider-
ations into design; land-use policies;building codes; insurance
Public health policies that recognise
climate risk; strengthened health
services; regional and internationalcooperation
Integrated planning (e.g. carrying
capacity; linkages with other
sectors); financial incentives, e.g.
subsidies and tax credits
Integrating climate change consider-
ations into national tr ansport policy;
investment in R&D for special
situations, e.g. permafrost areas
National energy policies, regulations,
and fiscal and financial incentives toencourage use of alternative
sources; incorporating climate
change in design standardsKey constraints and opportunities
to implementation (Normal font =
constraints; italics = opportunities )
Financial, human resources and
physical barriers; integrated water
resources management; synergies with
other sectors
Technological and financial
constraints; access to new varieties;
markets;  longer growing season in
higher latitudes; revenues from ‘new’
products
Financial and technological barriers;
availability of relocation space;
integrated policies and management;
synergies with sustainable development
goals
Limits to human tolerance (vulnerablegroups); knowledge limitations; financial
capacity; 
upgraded health services;
improved quality of life
Appeal/marketing of new attractions;financial and logistical challenges;
potential adverse impact on other
sectors (e.g. artificial sno w-making may
increase energy use); 
revenues from
‘new’ attractions; involvement of wider
group of stakeholders
Financial and technological barriers;availability of less vulnerable routes;
improved technologies and integration
with key sectors (e.g. energy)
Access to viable alternatives; financialand technological barriers; acceptanceof new technologies; 
stimulation of new
technologies; use of local resources
Note:
Other examples from many sectors would include early warning systems.
Future energy infrastructure investment decisions, ex-
pected to exceed US$20 trillion16 between 2005 and 2030,
will have long-term impacts on GHG emissions, because of
the long lifetimes of energy plants and other infrastructure
capital stock. The widespread diffusion of low-carbon tech-nologies may take many decades, even if early investments inthese technologies are made attractive. Initial estimates show
that returning global energy-related CO
2 emissions to 2005
levels by 2030 would require a large shift in investment pat-
terns, although the net additional investment required ranges
from negligible to 5 to 10%. {4.3}Sector
Water
Agriculture
Infrastructure/
settlement
(includingcoastal zones)
Human health
Tourism
Transport
Energy
1620 trillion = 20,000 billion = 20×1012Summary for Policymakers
16Figure SPM.10.  Estimated economic mitigation potential by sector in 2030 from bottom-up studies, compared to the respective baselines
assumed in the sector assessments. The potentials do not include non-technical options such as lifestyle changes. {Figure 4.2}
Notes:
a) The ranges for global economic potentials as assessed in each sector are shown by vertical lines. The ranges are based on end -use allocations of
emissions, meaning that emissions of electricity use are counted towards the end-use sectors and not to the energy supply secto r.
b) The estimated potentials have been constrained by the availability of studies particularly at high carbon price levels.c) Sectors used different baselines. For industry, the SRES B2 baseline was taken, for energy supply and transport, the World En ergy Outlook
(WEO) 2004 baseline was used; the building sector is based on a baseline in between SRES B2 and A1B; for waste, SRES A1B drivin g
forces were used to construct a waste-specific baseline; agriculture and forestry used baselines that mostly used B2 driving fo rces.
d) Only global totals for transport are shown because international aviation is included.
e) Categories excluded are: non-CO
2 emissions in buildings and transport, part of material efficiency options, heat production and co-genera-
tion in energy supply, heavy duty vehicles, shipping and high-oc cupancy passenger transport, most high-cost options for buildin gs, wastewa-
ter treatment, emission reduction from coal mines and gas pipelines, and fluorinated gases from energy supply and transport. Th e underes-
timation of the total economic potential from these emissions is of the order of 10 to 15%.Economic mitigation potentials by sector in 2030 estimated from bottom-up studies
2.4-4.7           1.6-2.5           5.3-6.7         2.5-5.5          2.3-6.4           1.3-4.2            0.4-1.0total sectoral potential at <US$100/tCO -eq in GtCO -eq/yr:2 2Energy supply      Transport         Buildings          Industry        Agriculture         Forestry              WasteWorld totalFigure SPM.9.  Global economic mitigation potential in 2030 estimated from bottom-up (Panel a) and top-down (Panel b) studies, compared with
the projected emissions increases from SRES scenarios relative to year 2000 GHG emissions of 40.8 GtCO2-eq (Panel c). Note: GHG emissions
in 2000 are exclusive of emissions of decay of above ground biomass that remains after logging and deforestation and from peat fires and
drained peat soils, to ensure consistency with the SRES emission results. {Figure 4.1}Comparison between global economic mitigation potential and projected emissions increase in 2030
05101520253035
A1FI A2 A1B A1T B1 B2Gt CO 2-eqc)
< 0 < 20 < 50 < 100 US$/tCO 2-eq
low end of range high end of range05101520253035a)
low end of range high end of range05101520253035< 20 < 50 < 100 US$/tCO 2-eqb) Increase in GHG emissions 
above year 2000 levelsBottom-up Top-down
Gt CO 2-eq Gt CO 2-eq Estimated mitigation potential in 2030
Estimated mitigation potential in 203017Summary for Policymakers
Table SPM.5  Selected examples of key sectoral mitigation technologies, policies and measures, constraints and opportunities. {Table 4.2}
Key mitigation technologies and practices currently commercially available.Key mitigation technologies and practices projected to be commercialisedbefore 2030 shown in italics.
Improved supply and distribution efficiency; fuel switching from coal to gas; nuclearpower; renewable heat and power (hydropower, solar, wind, geothermal and
bioenergy); combined heat and power; early applications of carbon dioxide capture
and storage (CCS) (e.g. storage of removed CO2 from natural gas); CCS for gas,
biomass and coal-fired electricity generating facilities; advanced nuclear power;advanced renewable energy, including tidal and wave energy, concentrating solar,and solar photovoltaics
More fuel-efficient v ehicles; hybrid vehicles; cleaner diesel vehicles; biofuels; modal
shifts from road transport to rail and public transport systems; non-motorisedtransport (cycling, walking); land-use and transport planning; second generation
biofuels; higher efficiency aircraft; advanced electric and hybrid vehicles with more
powerful and reliable batteries
Efficient lighting and daylighting; more efficient electrical appliances and heatingand cooling devices; improved cook stoves, improved insulation; passive and active
solar design for heating and cooling; alternative refrigeration fluids, recovery and
recycling of fluorinated gases; integrated design of commercial buildings including
technologies, such as intelligent meters that provide feedback and control; solar
photovoltaics integrated in buildings
More efficient end-use electrical equipment; heat and power recovery; materialrecycling and substitution; control of non-CO
2 gas emissions; and a wide array of
process-specific technologies; advanced energy efficiency; CCS for cement,
ammonia, and iron manufacture; inert electrodes for aluminium manufacture
Improved crop and grazing land management to increase soil carbon storage;restoration of cultivated peaty soils and degraded lands; improved rice cultivationtechniques and livestock and manure management to reduce CH
4 emissions;
improved nitrogen fertiliser application techniques to reduce N2O emissions;
dedicated energy crops to replace fossil fuel use; improved energy efficiency;improvements of crop yields
Afforestation; reforestation; forest management; reduced deforestation; harvestedwood product management; use of forestry products for bioenergy to replace fossil
fuel use; tree species improvement to increase biomass productivity and carbon
sequestration; improved remote sensing technologies for analysis of vegetation/soilcarbon sequestration potential and mapping land-use change
Landfill CH4 recovery; waste incineration with energy recovery; composting of
organic waste; controlled wastewater treatment; recycling and waste minimisation;biocovers and biofilters to optimise CH4 oxidationPolicies, measures and instruments shown to beenvironmentally effective
Reduction of fossil fuel subsidies; taxes or carbon charges
on fossil fuels
Feed-in tariffs for re newable energy technologies;
renewable energy obligations; producer subsidies
Mandatory fuel economy; biofuel blending and CO2standards for road transport
Taxes on vehicle purchase, registration, use and motor
fuels; road and parking pricing
Influence mobility needs through land-use regulations and
infrastructure planning; investment in attractive public
transport facilities and non-motorised forms of transport
Appliance standards and labelling
Building codes and certification
Demand-side management programmes
Public sector leadership programmes, including
procurement
Incentives for energy service companies (ESCOs)
Provision of benchmark infor mation; performance
standards; subsidies; tax credits
Tradable permits
Voluntary agreements
Financial incentives and regulations for improved land
management; maintaining soil carbon content; efficient use
of fertilisers and irrigation
Financial incentives (national and international) to
increase forest area, to reduce deforestation and to
maintain and manage forests; land-use regulation andenforcement
Financial incentives for improved waste and wastewater
management
Renewable energy incentives or obligations
Waste management regulationsKey constraints or opportunities
(Normal font = constraints;italics = opportunities )
Resistance by vested interests may make themdifficult to implement May be appropriate to create markets for low-emissions technologies
Partial coverage of vehicle fleet may limiteffectiveness
Effectiveness may drop with higher incomes Particularly appropriate for countries that arebuilding up their transportation systems
Periodic revision of standards neededAttractive for new buildings.  Enforcement can be
difficult
Need for regulations so that utilities may profitGovernment purchasing can expand demand forenergy-efficient productsSuccess factor: Access to third party financing May be appropriate to stimulate technology uptake.
Stability of national policy important in view of
international c ompetitiveness
Predictable allocation mechanisms and stable
price signals important for investments
Success factors include: clear targets, a baseline
scenario, third-party involvement in design and
review and formal provisions of monitoring, close
cooperation between government and industry May encourage synergy with sustainabledevelopment and with reducing vulnerability toclimate change, thereby overcoming barriers toimplementation
Constraints include lack of investment capital and
land tenure issues. Can help poverty alleviation
May stimulate technology diffusion
Local availability of low-cost fuel
Most effectively applied at national level with
enforcement strategiesSector
Energy supply
Transport
Buildings
Industry
Agriculture
Forestry/
forests
WasteSummary for Policymakers
18A wide variety of policies and instruments are avail-
able to governments to create the incentives for miti-
gation action. Their applicability depends on national
circumstances and sectoral context (Table SPM.5). {4.3}
They include integrating climate policies in wider devel-
opment policies, regulations and standards, taxes and charges,tradable permits, financial incentives, voluntary agreements,information instruments, and research, development and dem-
onstration (RD&D). 
{4.3}
An effective carbon-price signal could realise significant
mitigation potential in all sectors. Modelling studies show thatglobal carbon prices rising to US$20-80/tCO
2-eq by 2030 are
consistent with stabilisation at around 550ppm CO2-eq by 2100.
For the same stabilisation level, induced technological change
may lower these price ranges to US$5-65/tCO2-eq in 2030.17{4.3}
There is high agreement  and much evidence  that mitiga-
tion actions can result in near-term co-benefits (e.g. improvedhealth due to reduced air pollution) that may offset a substan-tial fraction of mitigation costs. 
{4.3}
There is high agreement  and medium evidence  that Annex
I countries’ actions may affect the global economy and global
emissions, although the scale of carbon leakage remains un-certain.
18 {4.3}
Fossil fuel exporting nations (in both Annex I and non-An-
nex I countries) may expect, as indicated in the TAR, lower de-mand and prices and lower GDP growth due to mitigation poli-
cies. The extent of this spillover depends strongly on assump-
tions related to policy decisions and oil market conditions. 
{4.3}
There is also high agreement  and medium evidence  that
changes in lifestyle, behaviour patterns and management prac-tices can contribute to climate change mitigation across all sec-tors. 
{4.3}
Many options for reducing global GHG emissions
through international cooperation exist. There is high
agreement  and much evidence  that notable achieve-
ments of the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol are theestablishment of a global response to climate change,stimulation of an array of national policies, and the cre-
ation of an international carbon market and new insti-
tutional mechanisms that may provide the foundationfor future mitigation efforts. Progress has also been made
in addressing adaptation within the UNFCCC and addi-
tional international initiatives have been suggested. 
{4.5}
Greater cooperative efforts and expansion of market mecha-
nisms will help to reduce global costs for achieving a given levelof mitigation, or will improve environmental effectiveness. Ef-forts can include diverse elements such as emissions targets;sectoral, local, sub-national and regional actions; RD&D
programmes; adopting common policies; implementing devel-
opment-oriented actions; or expanding financing instruments. 
{4.5}
In several sectors, climate response options can be
implemented to realise synergies and avoid conflictswith other dimensions of sustainable development.Decisions about macroeconomic and other non-climate
policies can significantly affect emissions, adaptive
capacity and vulnerability. 
{4.4, 5.8}
Making development more sustainable can enhance miti-
gative and adaptive capacities, reduce emissions and reducevulnerability, but there may be barriers to implementation. Onthe other hand, it is very likely  that climate change can slow
the pace of progress towards sustainable development. Over
the next half-century, climate change could impede achieve-ment of the Millennium Development Goals. 
{5.8}
5. The long-term perspective
Determining what constitutes “dangerous anthropo-
genic interference with the climate system” in relationto Article 2 of the UNFCCC involves value judgements.Science can support informed decisions on this issue,including by providing criteria for judging which vul-nerabilities might be labelled ‘key’. 
{Box ‘Key Vulnerabili-
ties and Article 2 of the UNFCCC’, Topic 5}
Key vulnerabilities19 may be associated with many cli-
mate-sensitive systems, including food supply, infrastructure,health, water resources, coastal systems, ecosystems, globalbiogeochemical cycles, ice sheets and modes of oceanic andatmospheric circulation. 
{Box ‘Key Vulnerabilities and Article 2 of
the UNFCCC’, Topic 5}
17Studies on mitigation portfolios and macro-economic costs assessed in this report are based on top-down modelling. Most models use a
global least-cost approach to mitigation portfolios, with universal emissions trading, assuming transparent markets, no transac tion cost, and
thus perfect implementation of mitigation measures throughout the 21st century. Costs are given for a specific point in time. Global modelled
costs will increase if some regions, sectors (e.g. land use), options or gases are excluded. Global modelled costs will decreas e with lower
baselines, use of revenues from carbon taxes and auctioned permits, and if induced technological learning is included. These mo dels do not consider
climate benefits and generally also co-benefits of mitigation measures, or equity issues. Significant progress has been achieve d in applying ap-
proaches based on induced technological change to stabilisation studies; however, conceptual issues remain. In the models that consider induced
technological change, projected costs for a given stabilisation level are reduced; the reductions are greater at lower stabilis ation level.
18 Further details may be found in Topic 4 of this Synthesis Report.
19Key vulnerabilities can be identified based on a number of criteria in the literature, including magnitude, timing, persistence /reversibility, the
potential for adaptation, distributional aspects, likelihood and ‘importance’ of the impacts.19Summary for Policymakers
The five ‘reasons for concern’ identified in the TAR re-
main a viable framework to consider key vulnerabili-
ties. These ‘reasons’ are assessed here to be stronger
than in the TAR. Many risks are identified with higher con-fidence. Some risks are projected to be larger or to occurat lower increases in temperature. Understanding aboutthe relationship between impacts (the basis for ‘reasonsfor concern’ in the TAR) and vulnerability (that includes
the ability to adapt to impacts) has improved. 
{5.2}
This is due to more precise identification of the circum-
stances that make systems, sectors and regions especially vul-nerable and growing evidence of the risks of very large im-pacts on multiple-century time scales. 
{5.2}
/circle6Risks to unique and threatened systems.   There is new
and stronger evidence of observed impacts of climate
change on unique and vulnerable systems (such as polarand high mountain communities and ecosystems), withincreasing levels of adverse impacts as temperatures in-crease further. An increasing risk of species extinction andcoral reef damage is projected with higher confidence than
in the TAR as warming proceeds. There is medium confi-
dence  that approximately 20 to 30% of plant and animal
species assessed so far are likely  to be at increased risk of
extinction if increases in global average temperature ex-ceed 1.5 to 2.5°C over 1980-1999 levels. Confidence hasincreased that a 1 to 2°C increase in global mean tem-
perature above 1990 levels (about 1.5 to 2.5°C above pre-
industrial) poses significant risks to many unique andthreatened systems including many biodiversity hotspots.Corals are vulnerable to thermal stress and have low adap-tive capacity. Increases in sea surface temperature of about1 to 3°C are projected to result in more frequent coral
bleaching events and widespread mortality, unless there
is thermal adaptation or acclimatisation by corals. Increasingvulnerability of indigenous communities in the Arctic andsmall island communities to warming is projected. 
{5.2}
/circle6Risks of extreme weather events.   Responses to some re-
cent extreme events reveal higher levels of vulnerability
than the TAR. There is now higher confidence in the pro-
jected increases in droughts, heat waves and floods, aswell as their adverse impacts. 
{5.2}
/circle6Distribution of impacts and vulnerabilities.   There are
sharp differences across regions and those in the weakesteconomic position are often the most vulnerable to cli-
mate change. There is increasing evidence of greater vul-
nerability of specific groups such as the poor and elderlynot only in developing but also in developed countries.Moreover, there is increased evidence that low-latitudeand less developed areas generally face greater risk, forexample in dry areas and megadeltas. 
{5.2}/circle6Aggregate impacts.   Compared to the TAR, initial net mar-
ket-based benefits from climate change are projected to
peak at a lower magnitude of warming, while damages
would be higher for larger magnitudes of warming. Thenet costs of impacts of increased warming are projectedto increase over time. 
{5.2}
/circle6Risks of large-scale singularities.  There is high confi-
dence  that global warming over many centuries would lead
to a sea level rise contribution from thermal expansion
alone that is projected to be much larger than observedover the 20
th century, with loss of coastal area and associ-
ated impacts. There is better understanding than in the TARthat the risk of additional contributions to sea level risefrom both the Greenland and possibly Antarctic ice sheets
may be larger than projected by ice sheet models and could
occur on century time scales. This is because ice dynami-cal processes seen in recent observations but not fully in-cluded in ice sheet models assessed in the AR4 could in-crease the rate of ice loss. 
{5.2}
There is high confidence  that neither adaptation nor
mitigation alone can avoid all climate change impacts;however, they can complement each other and togethercan significantly reduce the risks of climate change. 
{5.3}
Adaptation is necessary in the short and longer term to ad-
dress impacts resulting from the warming that would occur even
for the lowest stabilisation scenarios assessed. There are barriers,limits and costs, but these are not fully understood. Unmitigatedclimate change would, in the long term, be likely  to exceed the
capacity of natural, managed and human systems to adapt. Thetime at which such limits could be reached will vary between
sectors and regions. Early mitigation actions would avoid further
locking in carbon intensive infrastructure and reduce climatechange and associated adaptation needs. 
{5.2, 5.3}
Many impacts can be reduced, delayed or avoided by
mitigation. Mitigation efforts and investments over thenext two to three decades will have a large impact on
opportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels. De-
layed emission reductions significantly constrain theopportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels andincrease the risk of more severe climate change im-pacts. 
{5.3, 5.4, 5.7}
In order to stabilise the concentration of GHGs in the at-
mosphere, emissions would need to peak and decline thereaf-
ter. The lower the stabilisation level, the more quickly thispeak and decline would need to occur.
20 {5.4}
Table SPM.6 and Figure SPM.11 summarise the required
emission levels for different groups of stabilisation concen-trations and the resulting equilibrium global warming and long-
20For the lowest mitigation scenario category assessed, emissions would need to peak by 2015, and for the highest, by 2090 (see T able SPM.6).
Scenarios that use alternative emission pathways show substantial differences in the rate of global climate change.Summary for Policymakers
20Table SPM.6.  Characteristics of post-TAR stabilisation scenarios and resulting long-term equilibrium global average temperature and
the sea level rise component from thermal expansion only.a {Table 5.1}Category
CO2 concentration
at stabilisation
(2005 = 379 ppm)b
CO2-equivalent
concentration at
stabilisation including
GHGs and aerosols(2005 = 375 ppm)
b
Peaking year for CO2
emissionsa,c
Change in global CO2
emissions in 2050(percent of 2000
emissions)
a,c
Global averagetemperature increase
above pre-industrial atequilibrium, using ‘best
estimate’ climate
sensitivity
d, e
Global average sea levelrise above pre-industrial
at equilibrium from
thermal expansiononly
f
Number of assessedscenarios
 ppm ppm year percent °C metres
I 350 – 400 445 – 490 2000 – 2015 -85 to -50 2.0 – 2.4 0.4 – 1.4 6
II 400 – 440 490 – 535 2000 – 2020 -60 to -30 2.4 – 2.8 0.5 – 1.7 18III 440 – 485 535 – 590 2010 – 2030 -30 to +5 2.8 – 3.2 0.6 – 1.9 21IV 485 – 570 590 – 710 2020 – 2060 +10 to +60 3.2 – 4.0 0.6 – 2.4 118V 570 – 660 710 – 855 2050 – 2080 +25 to +85 4.0 – 4.9 0.8 – 2.9 9VI 660 – 790 855 – 1130 2060 – 2090 +90 to +140 4.9 – 6.1 1.0 – 3.7 5
Notes:
a) The emission reductions to meet a particular stabilisation lev el reported in the mitigation studies assessed here might be un deresti-
mated due to missing carbon cycle feedbac ks (see also Topic 2.3).
b) Atmospheric CO2 concentrations were 379ppm in 2005. The best estimate of total CO2-eq concentration in 2005 for all long-lived
GHGs is about 455ppm, while the corresponding value including the net effect of all anthropogenic forcing agents is 375ppm CO2-eq.
c) Ranges correspond to the 15th to 85th percentile of the post-TAR scenario distribution. CO2 emissions are shown so multi-gas scenarios
can be compared with CO2-only scenarios (see Figure SPM.3).
d) The best estimate of climate sensitivity is 3°C.e) Note that global average temperature at equilibrium is different from expected global average temperature at the time of stab ilisation of
GHG concentrations due to the inertia of the climate system. For the majority of scenarios assessed, stabilisation of GHG conce ntra-
tions occurs between 2100 and 2150 (see also Footnote 21).
f) Equilibrium sea level rise is for the contribution from ocean thermal expansion only and does not reach equilibrium for at le ast many
centuries. These values have been estimated using relatively simple climate models (one low-resolution AOGCM and several EMICs
based on the best estimate of 3°C climate sensitivity) and do not include contributions from melting ice sheets, glaciers and i ce caps.
Long-term thermal expansion is projected to result in 0.2 to 0.6m per degree Celsius of global average warming above pre-indust rial.
(AOGCM refers to Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation Model and EMICs to Earth System Models of Intermediate Complexity.)
21Estimates for the evolution of temperature over the course of this century are not available in the AR4 for the stabilisation s cenarios. For most
stabilisation levels, global average temperature is approaching the equilibrium level over a few centuries. For the much lower stabilisation
scenarios (category I and II, Figure SPM.11), the equilibrium temperature may be reached earlier.term sea level rise due to thermal expansion only.21 The tim-
ing and level of mitigation to reach a given temperature
stabilisation level is earlier and more stringent if climate sen-
sitivity is high than if it is low. {5.4, 5.7}
Sea level rise under warming is inevitable. Thermal ex-
pansion would continue for many centuries after GHG con-centrations have stabilised, for any of the stabilisation levelsassessed, causing an eventual sea level rise much larger than
projected for the 21
st century. The eventual contributions from
Greenland ice sheet loss could be several metres, and largerthan from thermal expansion, should warming in excess of1.9 to 4.6°C above pre-industrial be sustained over many cen-turies. The long time scales of thermal expansion and ice sheetresponse to warming imply that stabilisation of GHG concen-
trations at or above present levels would not stabilise sea level
for many centuries. 
{5.3, 5.4}
There is high agreement  and much evidence  that
all stabilisation levels assessed can be achieved bydeployment of a portfolio of technologies that are ei-
ther currently available or expected to be commercialised
in coming decades, assuming appropriate and effec-
tive incentives are in place for their development,acquisition, deployment and diffusion and addressingrelated barriers. 
{5.5}
All assessed stabilisation scenarios indicate that 60 to 80%
of the reductions would come from energy supply and use
and industrial processes, with energy efficiency playing a key
role in many scenarios. Including non-CO2 and CO2 land-use
and forestry mitigation options provides greater flexibility andcost-effectiveness. Low stabilisation levels require early invest-ments and substantially more rapid diffusion andcommercialisation of advanced low-emissions technologies. 
{5.5}
Without substantial investment flows and effective tech-
nology transfer, it may be difficult to achieve emission reduc-tion at a significant scale. Mobilising financing of incremen-tal costs of low-carbon technologies is important. 
{5.5}21Summary for Policymakers
Figure SPM.11.  Global CO2 emissions for 1940 to 2000 and emissions ranges for categories of stabilisation scenarios from 2000 to 2100 (left-
hand panel); and the corresponding relationship between the stabilisation target and the likely  equilibrium global average temperature increase
above pre-industrial (right-hand panel). Approaching equilibrium can take several centuries, especially for scenarios with high er levels of stabilisation.
Coloured shadings show stabilisation scenarios grouped according to different targets (stabilisation category I to VI). The rig ht-hand panel
shows ranges of global average temperature change above pre-industrial, using (i) ‘best estimate’ climate sensitivity of 3°C (b lack line in middle
of shaded area), (ii) upper bound of likely  range of climate sensitivity of 4.5°C (red line at top of shaded area) (iii) lower bound of likely  range of
climate sensitivity of 2°C (blue line at bottom of shaded area). Black dashed lines in the left panel give the emissions range of recent baseline
scenarios published since the SRES (2000). Emissions ranges of the stabilisation scenarios comprise CO2-only and multigas scenarios and
correspond to the 10th to 90th percentile of the full scenario distribution. Note: CO2 emissions in most models do not include emissions from decay
of above ground biomass that remains after logging and deforestation, and from peat fires and drained peat soils. {Figure 5.1}CO2 emissions and equilibrium temperature increases for a range of stabilisation levels
Equilibrium global average temperature
increase above pre-industrial (°C)
GHG concentration stabilisation level (ppm CO -eq)2Y earWorld CO  emissions (GtCO  /yr)22
22See Footnote 17 for more detail on cost estimates and model assumptions.The macro-economic costs of mitigation generally rise
with the stringency of the stabilisation target (TableSPM.7). For specific countries and sectors, costs varyconsiderably from the global average.
22 {5.6}In 2050, global average macro-economic costs for mitiga-
tion towards stabilisation between 710 and 445ppm CO2-eq are
between a 1% gain and 5.5% decrease of global GDP (TableSPM.7). This corresponds to slowing average annual global GDPgrowth by less than 0.12 percentage points. 
{5.6}
Table SPM.7.  Estimated global macro-economic costs in 2030 and 2050. Costs are relative to the baseline for least-cost trajectories
towards different long-term stabilisation levels. {Table 5.2}
Stabilisation levels Median GDP reductiona (%) Range of GDP reductionb (%) Reduction of average annual GDP
(ppm CO2-eq) growth rates (percentage points) c,e
2030 2050 2030 2050 2030      2050
445 – 535d             Not available < 3 < 5.5 < 0.12      < 0.12
535 – 590 0.6 1.3  0.2 to 2.5 slightly negative to 4 < 0.1      < 0.1
590 – 710 0.2 0.5 -0.6 to 1.2 -1 to 2 < 0.06      < 0.05
Notes:
Values given in this table correspond to the full literature across all baselines and mitigation scenarios that provide GDP num bers.
a) Global GDP based on market exchange rates.b) The 10
th and 90th percentile range of the analysed data are given where applicable. Negative values indicate GDP gain. The first row
(445-535ppm CO2-eq) gives the upper bound estimate of the literature only.
c) The calculation of the reduction of the annual growth rate is based on the average reduction during the assessed period that would
result in the indicated GDP decrease by 2030 and 2050 respectively.
d) The number of studies is relatively small and they generally use low baselines. High emissions baselines generally lead to hi gher costs.
e) The values correspond to the highest estimate for GDP reduction shown in column three.Summary for Policymakers
2223Net economic costs of damages from climate change aggregated across the globe and discounted to the specified year.Responding to climate change involves an iterative risk
management process that includes both adaptation and
mitigation and takes into account climate change dam-
ages, co-benefits, sustainability, equity and attitudesto risk. 
{5.1}
Impacts of climate change are very likely  to impose net
annual costs, which will increase over time as global tem-peratures increase. Peer-reviewed estimates of the social cost
of carbon
23 in 2005 average US$12 per tonne of CO2, but the
range from 100 estimates is large (-$3 to $95/tCO2). This is
due in large part to differences in assumptions regarding cli-mate sensitivity, response lags, the treatment of risk and eq-uity, economic and non-economic impacts, the inclusion ofpotentially catastrophic losses and discount rates. Aggregate
estimates of costs mask significant differences in impactsacross sectors, regions and populations and very likely  under-
estimate damage costs because they cannot include many non-
quantifiable impacts. {5.7}
Limited and early analytical results from integrated analy-
ses of the costs and benefits of mitigation indicate that theyare broadly comparable in magnitude, but do not as yet permitan unambiguous determination of an emissions pathway orstabilisation level where benefits exceed costs. 
{5.7}
Climate sensitivity is a key uncertainty for mitigation sce-
narios for specific temperature levels. {5.4}
Choices about the scale and timing of GHG mitigation
involve balancing the economic costs of more rapid emissionreductions now against the corresponding medium-term andlong-term climate risks of delay. 
{5.7}