Submitted to the ICLR 2024 Workshop: Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
ANADAPTIVE HYDROPOWER MANAGEMENT AP-
PROACH FOR DOWNSTREAM ECOSYSTEM PRESERVA -
TION
C. Coelho1, M. Jin2, M. Fernanda P. Costa1, L.L. Ferr ´as1,3
1Centre of Mathematics (CMAT), University of Minho
2Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, V A 24061
3Department of Mechanical Engineering (Section of Mathematics), FEUP - University of Porto
cmartins@cmat.uminho.pt, jinming@vt.edu, mfc@math.uminho.pt, lferras@fe.up.pt
ABSTRACT
Hydropower plants play a pivotal role in advancing clean and sustainable energy
production, contributing significantly to the global transition towards renewable
energy sources. However, hydropower plants are currently perceived both posi-
tively as sources of renewable energy and negatively as disruptors of ecosystems.
In this work, we highlight the overlooked potential of using hydropower plant as
protectors of ecosystems by using adaptive ecological discharges. To advocate
for this perspective, we propose using a neural network to predict the minimum
ecological discharge value at each desired time. Additionally, we present a novel
framework that seamlessly integrates it into hydropower management software,
taking advantage of the well-established approach of using traditional constrained
optimisation algorithms. This novel approach not only protects the ecosystems
from climate change but also contributes to potentially increase the electricity
production.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The link between fossil fuel-based energy production and global warming has spurred intensive
exploration into alternative, cleaner energy sources. Hydropower plants play a pivotal role in ad-
vancing clean and sustainable energy production, contributing significantly to the global transition
towards renewable energy sources. By harnessing the kinetic energy of flowing water, hydropower
offers a reliable and consistent electricity source devoid of greenhouse gas emissions or other pol-
lutants. Its renewable nature, combined with the capacity for large-scale power generation, makes
hydropower an important clean energy production strategy. Furthermore, hydropower plants play a
critical role in addressing the intermittent nature of other renewable sources such as solar and wind,
improving the stability of the grid, and providing energy storage through reservoirs (Chala et al.,
2019). Compared to fossil fuel alternatives, hydropower has a relatively low environmental foot-
print, contributing to a decrease in air pollution and efforts to combat climate change. As nations
strive to achieve ambitious carbon reduction targets, hydropower stands out as a versatile and envi-
ronmentally friendly solution, playing a crucial role in building a sustainable energy future (Berga,
2016). However, the construction of hydropower plants within ecosystems demands meticulous
consideration of normal flow dynamics to mitigate potential environmental impacts. The ecosystem
of a river is a complex web of interconnected relationships between various organisms, water quality
parameters, and physical features. The normal flow of a river plays a crucial role in the maintenance
of biodiversity and the support of aquatic habitats. When planning and implementing a hydropower
project, it is imperative to maintain normal flow patterns to minimise disruptions to the ecosystem.
Alteration of flow can affect fish migration, sediment transport, and nutrient distribution, potentially
leading to habitat degradation and loss of biodiversity (Kuriqi et al., 2021). By preserving normal
flow, run-of-river hydropower projects can strike a balance between clean energy generation and
environmental sustainability, thus promoting the coexistence of renewable energy development and
ecosystem health.
1Submitted to the ICLR 2024 Workshop: Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
To mitigate the impact to the ecosystem of hydropower plants, governments mandate minimum
discharges, designated by ecological discharges, to promote normal river flow. The fixed levels of
ecological discharges for maintaining normal river flow are typically established through a combina-
tion of scientific research, environmental impact assessments, and regulatory frameworks. Although
these levels are intended to protect against detrimental ecological impacts, one challenge is that
they may not readily adapt to climate change dynamics. Climate change can lead to alterations
in precipitation patterns, temperature regimes, and hydrological cycles, potentially affecting river
ecosystems. As climate-related shifts occur, the fixed discharge levels may become less representa-
tive of the evolving environmental conditions (Ren ¨of¨alt et al., 2010). This highlights the need for a
dynamic and adaptive regulatory approach that can accommodate the uncertainties associated with
climate change, ensuring that environmental discharge standards remain effective in preserving river
ecosystems amidst a changing climate.
Non-compliance with environmental regulations can result in fines imposed on hydropower man-
agement companies. Consequently, and due to the difficulty of the problem, these companies turn to
software tools to optimise water management, enabling them to make optimal decisions over various
time periods. This management problem can be formulated as a constrained optimisation problem,
with ecological discharges being one of the many constraints to be satisfied (Grygier & Stedinger,
1985; Helseth et al., 2020).
Due to the absence of monetary incentives for allocating water beyond minimum discharges, com-
panies and their management software ultimately strictly adhere to allocating the mandate amount
of water. However, the static nature of the imposed ecological discharges may be ill-suited to the
dynamic needs of ecosystems, aggravated by factors such as climate change. Guidelines may not
be adjusted to accommodate these changing needs, leading to a potential insufficiency of water to
promote the well-being of habitats caused by periods of drought or when atmospheric conditions are
more favourable to water evaporation. Conversely, it may promote unnecessary discharges, espe-
cially during wet periods, that could be used for energy generation or storage. The latter underscores
how adaptive minimum ecological discharges could benefit hydropower management companies.
Moreover, hydropower plants are currently perceived both positively as sources of renewable energy
and negatively as disruptors of ecosystems. In this paper, our primary objective is to underscore the
overlooked potential of using hydropower plants as protectors of ecosystems by strategically manag-
ing water storage and intelligent discharge. By maintaining the delicate balance of ecosystems dur-
ing extreme conditions, such as dry periods, hydropower plants can serve as a defence mechanism
against the impacts of climate change. To advocate for this perspective, we propose an innovative
approach: an adaptive minimum ecological discharge predictor leveraging a neural network (NN).
In addition, we present a novel framework that seamlessly integrates it into hydropower manage-
ment software. Our proposed framework takes advantage of the well-established approach of using
traditional constrained optimisation algorithms and uses the adaptive minimum ecological discharge
predictor to dictate the minimum discharge value at each solving time.
2 P ROPOSED METHOD
Owing to the problem’s high-dimensionality, incorporating numerous variables (energy demand,
water availability, turbine efficiency, etc.) and constraints (maximum reservoir capacity, ecologi-
cal discharges, etc.). This complex problem is typically formulated as the constrained optimisa-
tion problem equation 1, aiming at maximising an objective function l(θ), typically defined by the
amount of electricity generated, equating to the company’s profit, while satisfying some constraints
(Feng et al., 2017; Grygier & Stedinger, 1985). Here, we focus on the constraints related to meeting
electricity demand and minimum water guidelines for irrigation and ecosystem preservation:
max
θ∈Rnθl(θ),
s.t. P (θ)≥Pdemand ,
Qriver(θ)≥Qmin
river,
Qirrigation (θ)≥Qmin
irrigation ,(1)
2Submitted to the ICLR 2024 Workshop: Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
where θ∈Rnθare the parameters to optimise, lis the objective function, Pis the electricity gener-
ated,Pdemand the electricity demand, Qriver the amount of water allocated to ecological discharge,
Qmin
river the minimum water guideline for ecological discharge, Qirrigation the amount of water allo-
cated for irrigation and Qmin
irrigation the minimum water guideline for irrigation.
In this paper, we propose Qmin
river to be given by the output of a NN with parameters ϕ,Qmin
river =
NN(ϕ). This NN predicts the necessary water quantity required to prevent stress on the ecosystem,
taking into account anticipated atmospheric conditions, past discharge data and river basin level his-
tory. The effectiveness of the predictions relies on the choice of the loss function used to train the
model. As an initial guideline, we recommend deviating from the usual prediction versus ground-
truth error, given that past discharges may not represent an optimal reference. Subsequently, em-
ploying a traditional optimisation algorithm, equation 1 is solved to obtain the optimal management
solution. This optimisation process incorporates the adaptive constraint defined by the minimum
ecological discharge provided by the NN, Figure 1 in appendix A.
Nevertheless, NNs are considered black-box models, making it challenging, and at times impossible,
to discern the relationships learned from data. This inherent opacity poses a potential problem, as
we cannot risk a situation where a NN provides an exceptionally low minimum ecological discharge
value that might stress the ecosystem, simply because abundant rain is anticipated in the near future.
Such outcomes could result in fines for management companies, discouraging the adoption of this
adaptive strategy. To mitigate this potential issue, we propose the explicit integration of expert
knowledge constraints into the NN (Coelho et al., 2023). The idea is to incorporate inequality
constraints on the minimum ecological discharge value, ensuring that scenarios of undue stress on
the ecosystem are avoided. We suggest determining the values of these inequality constraints based
on the current river basin level and a fixed, invariant to the season, recommended river basin level
provided by environmental authorities.
While initially appearing as potentially detrimental to management companies, a closer examination
reveals otherwise. Relying on fixed minimum ecological discharges can lead to unnecessary disposal
of water that could otherwise be used for electricity generation, particularly under conditions of min-
imal water evaporation or the presence of rainfall. These factors contribute to reducing the necessity
for ecological discharges, presenting an opportunity for profit increase. During dry summer periods
when fixed ecological discharges might prove insufficient for maintaining downstream ecosystem
health, our proposed framework should dynamically adjust the constraint, allocating less water for
electricity generation, potentially decreasing profits, and possibly jeopardising the ability to meet
electricity demand. However, during dry seasons characterised by intense sunlight, we recommend
combining our proposed method with solar panels. Despite increased water allocation for ecolog-
ical discharges, electricity demand and company profits can be sustained through the use of solar
panels for power generation. This integrated approach ensures adaptability and resilience for hy-
dropower management companies under varying climatic conditions. To incentivise companies to
adopt this approach, we encourage governments to provide incentives, such as financial support for
the expenses associated with implementing solar panels (Zientara, 2023).
3 C ONCLUSION
In this preliminary study, we underscore the challenges associated with fixed constraints pertain-
ing to minimum ecological discharges in hydropower management software. The current approach
of employing static guidelines, incapable of adapting promptly to atmospheric conditions, poses a
threat to ecosystems, especially during unexpected dry seasons. Additionally, enforcing fixed min-
imum ecological discharges compels management companies to adhere rigidly to these standards,
leading to potential misalignment during wet periods when the allocated water might not be neces-
sary. In such cases, to avoid fines, water is wasted instead of being used for electricity generation or
stored for future use. This inflexibility highlights the need for a more adaptive and dynamic approach
to ecological discharge management in hydropower systems. To promote this idea, we propose a
framework that still uses a traditional constrained optimisation algorithm to solve the management
problem that receives the minimum ecological discharge value from a NN that is able to, using at-
mospheric conditions and previous ecological discharges, predict the amount of discharge needed
for promoting a healthy ecosystem.
3Submitted to the ICLR 2024 Workshop: Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
Our proposal encourages a paradigm shift, portraying hydropower plants as substantial batteries
capable of generating clean energy while concurrently promoting ecosystem well-being. This per-
spective offers a pathway to mitigate the impact of climate change on the environment.
REFERENCES
Luis Berga. The role of hydropower in climate change mitigation and adaptation: a review. Engi-
neering , 2(3):313–318, 2016.
Girma T Chala, MIN Ma’Arof, and Rakesh Sharma. Trends in an increased dependence towards
hydropower energy utilization—a short review. Cogent Engineering , 6(1):1631541, 2019.
C. Coelho, M. Fernanda P. Costa, and Luis L. Ferr ´as. Prior knowledge meets neural odes: a
two-stage training method for improved explainability. In Krystal Maughan, Rosanne Liu, and
Thomas F. Burns (eds.), The First Tiny Papers Track at ICLR 2023, Tiny Papers @ ICLR 2023,
Kigali, Rwanda, May 5, 2023 . OpenReview.net, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
pdf?id=p7sHcNt_tqo .
Zhong-Kai Feng, Wen-Jing Niu, Jian-Zhong Zhou, and Chun-Tian Cheng. Multiobjective Operation
Optimization of a Cascaded Hydropower System. Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management , 143(10):05017010, October 2017. ISSN 0733-9496, 1943-5452. doi: 10.1061/
(ASCE)WR.1943-5452.0000824.
Jan C Grygier and Jery R Stedinger. Algorithms for optimizing hydropower system operation. Water
Resources Research , 21(1):1–10, 1985.
Arild Helseth, Birger Mo, and Hans Olaf H ˚agenvik. Nonconvex environmental constraints in hy-
dropower scheduling. In 2020 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to
Power Systems (PMAPS) , pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2020.
Alban Kuriqi, Ant ´onio N Pinheiro, Alvaro Sordo-Ward, Mar ´ıa D Bejarano, and Luis Garrote. Eco-
logical impacts of run-of-river hydropower plants—current status and future prospects on the
brink of energy transition. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 142:110833, 2021.
Birgitta Malm Ren ¨of¨alt, Roland Jansson, and Christer Nilsson. Effects of hydropower generation
and opportunities for environmental flow management in swedish riverine ecosystems. Freshwa-
ter Biology , 55(1):49–67, 2010.
Ben Zientara. Solar incentives in the usa: what’s out there and how
to claim it, 2023. URL https://www.solarreviews.com/blog/
the-top-solar-incentive-programs-in-the-us . Last Accessed: 2024-02-
06.
4Submitted to the ICLR 2024 Workshop: Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
A S CHEME OF THE PROPOSED METHOD
NNoutputinput
input
constraintsinputWeather Station
Constrained Optimization Problem
Instant River Level
Historical Discharges Expert Knowledge
Figure 1: Graphical representation of the proposed method.
5