Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
XINGU : EXPLAINING CRITICAL GEOSPATIAL PREDIC -
TIONS IN WEAK SUPERVISION FOR CLIMATE FINANCE
David Dao, Johannes Rausch, Iveta Rott and Ce Zhang
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
fdavid.dao,jrausch,rotti,ce.zhang g@inf.ethz.ch
ABSTRACT
Monitoring, Reporting, and Veriﬁcation (MRV) play a crucial key role in the
decision-making of climate investors, policymakers and conservationists. Remote
sensing is commonly used for MRV but practical solutions are constrained by
a lack of labels to train machine learning-based downstream tasks. Recent work
leverages weak supervision to alleviate the problem of labeled data scarcity. How-
ever, the deﬁnition of weak supervision signals is limited by the existence of mil-
lions of possible heuristic-based feature generation rules. Furthermore these rules
are often difﬁcult to interpret for climate ﬁnance and underperform in critical data
subsets. We propose Xingu, an interpretable MRV system to explain weak su-
pervision rules using game-theoretic SHAP values for critical model predictions.
Moreover Xingu enables domain experts to collectively design and share labeling
functions, thus curating a reusable knowledge base for weak supervision signals.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Humanity is facing an unprecedented climate crisis and decisive action is required to tackle global
warming. Land use and land use change (LULUC) play a critical role in our climate, taking up about
a quarter of annual anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) during 2007-2016 (IPCC
(2019)). In addition to being a key driver of global warming, careless land use is also destroying
valuable ecosystem services and is threatening the livelihood for local populations and a multitude
of species.
Multiple climate ﬁnance instruments have been established to reward landowners for sustainable
land use REDD+, Payment for Ecosystem Services and biodiversity banking (D ´ıaz et al. (2015)).
A key task of global climate ﬁnance is the Monitoring, Reporting and Veriﬁcation (MRV) of global
change in land use, forests and biodiversity (Dao et al. (2019a)). Aircraft- or satellite-based MRV
is crucial for the decision making of stakeholders such as government agencies and private climate
investors. Machine learning approaches have shown to be effective to automatically perform MRV-
tasks, but are limited by a lack of task-speciﬁc labels. Due to this lack of available labeled data,
recent work has thus been focusing instead on leveraging weak supervision to generate training data
via labeling functions (Ratner et al. (2016), Dao et al. (2019b)).
However, weak supervision systems are facing a multitude of challenges that make decision making
within climate ﬁnance difﬁcult:
1. The enormous availability of geospatial data is restricting domain experts in building strong
labeling rules. For instance, Google’s Earth Engine data catalog provides 376 datasets (as
of January 2020), each providing multiple possible bands. Facing millions of possible
combinations and preprocessing rules, domain experts struggle to select and design the
right weak label generators.
2. Being able to interpret model predictions is an important requirement for transparent and
fair decision making in climate ﬁnance. However outcomes from an MRV system trained
Authors have contributed equally.
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 1: Local explanations of labeling functions. In data programming, labeling functions are
used to estimate a generative model in order to predict probabilistic labels. Surprisingly, on the
same time geospatial labeling functions can also be represented as ternary feature maps. Thus the
role and relationship of labeling functions towards a prediction on labeled critical data subsets can
be approximately explained using their corresponding SHAP values.
with weak supervision are difﬁcult to explain. Especially the role of labeling functions in
data programming predictions is not well understood.
3. Especially critical outcomes for climate ﬁnance (e.g selective logging or mining in LU-
LUC) correspond to, often rare, data subsets or slices (Chen et al. (2019)). While MRV
models that leverage weak supervision can achieve overall high accuracy, they may under-
perform on critical subsets due to lack of slice-speciﬁc training data.
4. Weak supervision approaches that are constrained to the image domain are often unable
to incorporate highly informative location-speciﬁc, socio-economic or political data. For
instance, weak supervision such as night lights (Jean et al. (2016)) or Doc2Vec represen-
tations extracted from geotagged Wikipedia articles (Sheehan et al. (2018)) can be used as
features for socio-economic growth prediction.
We propose Xingu: An interpretable automated MRV system that addresses the aforementioned
issues with respect to feature design and transparency issues in climate ﬁnance:
1. Xingu enables domain experts to design and share labeling functions for speciﬁc tasks.
Understanding the role of labeling functions of a certain task then allows us to recommend
these functions for novel but similar tasks.
2. Xingu incorporates SHAP (Lundberg & Lee (2017)), a method that allows measurement
of feature-importance on a given dataset. As such, features can be scored and interpreted
in terms of their usefulness. All labeling functions that are used in our system are deﬁned
as ternary maps (corresponding to yes,no,abstain ). As such, we can obtain additional
information about the importance of labeling functions by using them as feature inputs
for tree-based models on critical data slices and explaining their predictions via their data
importance values (Jia et al. (2019b;a)). As we see in Section 2, this provides us with a
novel way to investigate the role of labeling functions in critical prediction tasks.
3. Our system provides an interface that allows stakeholders to contribute small labeled sam-
ples of performance-critical regions. Subsequently, expert features can be analyzed in terms
of their individual impact on the region samples.
4. Xingu enables domain experts to build features that incorporate political or socioeconomic
information. For example, features that make use of night lights satellite images could be
impactful in the context of training a deforestation classiﬁer, as they are an indicator of
human activity.
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 2: Xingu’s workﬂow. Domain experts are encouraged to design labeling functions and submit
task-speciﬁc critical data slices with the community. Using data programming, a slice-aware ML
model is then trained and interpreted. Finally the results are displayed in an interactive web-based
UI.
2 U NDERSTANDING CRITICAL PREDICTIONS WITH FEATURE IMPORTANCE
Xingu applies leverages weakly labeled datasets by allowing users to deﬁne labeling functions in-
stead of hand-labeling individual examples (Ratner et al. (2017)). Based on overlaps of multiple
labeling functions for given data points, a generative model is trained in order to predict probabilis-
tic labels. In contrast to other work that utilized weak supervision rules to generate noisy training
labels, Xingu further aims to explain the role of individual weak supervision rules by using local
SHAP value explanations on critical data slices. These explanations are used as a basis for an an
interactive report that is provided to domain experts.
2.1 I NTERPRETING GEOSPATIAL LABELING FUNCTIONS USING SHAP
SHAP is a game-theoretic approach to explain the output of model using the Shapley value. SHAP
values explain how much a feature pushes the model output from the base value (the average model
output over the training dataset we passed) to the model output. In order to leverage SHAP for
labeling functions, we explore the surprising note that every labeling function for geospatial input
can also be represented as a tenary feature map. Finally we use this feature map representation of a
labeling function as input to SHAP’s tree explainer model to extract its corresponding SHAP values
on the provided critical data subsets as shown in Figure 1.
2.2 C URATING A WEB -BASED KNOWLEDGE BASE
Xingu workﬂow as shown in Figure 2 enable domain experts to interactively submit their custom la-
beling functions and explore its explanations. Domain experts can also decide to share their labeling
functions, processing scripts and a description with a public community. The community can then
rate the quality of contributions and manage them in a public forum (Dao et al. (2018)). Domain
experts can also decide to share their tasks and critical data slices (represented as a collection of
GeoJSON) with the public. Xingu’s goal is to enable domain experts to curate a knowledge base
of good labeling functions and critical data slices over time that can be reused, either as templates
for future geospatial analysis projects on related scenarios or as baselines for further explorations
on the same scenario. Collectively curating labeling functions provides an opportunity to not only
understand the relationship between these functions (e.g. exclusive, overlapping) and their impact,
but also to recommend suitable labeling functions for novel tasks using task similarity (Zamir et al.
(2018)).
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
3 D ISCUSSION
Xingu facilitates training of machine learning-based MRVs for various downstream tasks by lever-
aging domain expertise of critical data regions. Over the coming years, geospatial data is expected
to grow rapidly, with more and more observation infrastructure in place (smaller satellites, more
cost-efﬁcient launching rockets). Better technology deployed as part of this growing infrastructure
will deliver higher resolution images, as well as different non-image data streams. An interpretable
and adaptable MRV system is therefore crucial to guide climate investors and policymakers in their
decision-making.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are thankful for the guidance and advise by the CONAF (Daniel Montaner, Cesar Mattar,
Jose Antonio Prado). Part of this research has been developed as part of the OpenSurface platform
and a real-world pilot in Chile, which was launched at the COP25 United Nation’s Climate Summit.
OpenSurface is funded by IDBLab and EIT Climate-KIC.
REFERENCES
Vincent S. Chen, Sen Wu, Zhenzhen Weng, Alexander Ratner, and Christopher R ´e. Slice-based
learning: A programming model for residual learning in critical data slices, 2019.
David Dao, Dan Alistarh, Claudiu Musat, and Ce Zhang. Databright: Towards a global exchange
for decentralized data ownership and trusted computation, 2018.
David Dao, Catherine Cang, Clement Fung, Ming Zhang, Nick Pawlowski, Reuven Gonzales, Nick
Beglinger, and Ce Zhang. GainForest: Scaling Climate Finance for Forest Conservation using
Interpretable Machine Learning on Satellite Imagery. ICML Climate Change AI workshop 2019 ,
2019a.
David Dao, Johannes Rausch, and Ce Zhang. Geolabels: Towards efﬁcient ecosystem monitoring
using data programming on geospatial information. In 2019 NeurIPS Workshop on Tackling
Climate Change with AI , 2019b.
Sandra D ´ıaz, Sebsebe Demissew, Julia Carabias, Carlos Joly, Mark Lonsdale, Neville Ash, Anne
Larigauderie, Jay Ram Adhikari, Salvatore Arico, Andr ´as B ´aldi, et al. The IPBES Conceptual
Framework—connecting nature and people. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability ,
14:1–16, 2015.
IPCC. 2019: Summary for policymakers. In P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V . Masson-
Delmotte, H.-O. P ¨ortner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat,
E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley,
K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, and J. Malley (eds.), Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special
report on climate change, desertiﬁcation, land degradation, sustainable land management, food
security, and greenhouse gas ﬂuxes in terrestrial ecosystems , pp. 7–11. 2019.
Neal Jean, Marshall Burke, Michael Xie, W. Matthew Davis, David B. Lobell, and Stefano Er-
mon. Combining satellite imagery and machine learning to predict poverty. Science , 353(6301):
790–794, 2016. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf7894. URL https://science.
sciencemag.org/content/353/6301/790 .
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nezihe Merve Gurel, Bo Li, Ce Zhang,
Costas Spanos, and Dawn Song. Efﬁcient task-speciﬁc data valuation for nearest neighbor algo-
rithms. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 12(11):1610–1623, 2019a.
Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nick Hynes, Nezihe Merve G ¨urel, Bo Li,
Ce Zhang, Dawn Song, and Costas J Spanos. Towards efﬁcient data valuation based on the
shapley value. In The 22nd International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pp.
1167–1176, 2019b.
4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predic-
tions. In I. Guyon, U. V . Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vish-
wanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 , pp.
4765–4774. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
7062-a-unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf .
Alexander Ratner, Stephen H. Bach, Henry Ehrenberg, Jason Fries, Sen Wu, and Christopher R ´e.
Snorkel: Rapid Training Data Creation with Weak Supervision. Proc. VLDB Endow. , 11(3):
269–282, November 2017. ISSN 2150-8097. doi: 10.14778/3157794.3157797. URL https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3157794.3157797 .
Alexander J Ratner, Christopher M De Sa, Sen Wu, Daniel Selsam, and Christopher R ´e. Data
programming: Creating large training sets, quickly. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pp. 3567–3575, 2016.
Evan Sheehan, Burak Uzkent, Chenlin Meng, Zhongyi Tang, Marshall Burke, David Lobell, and
Stefano Ermon. Learning to interpret satellite images using wikipedia, 2018.
Amir Roshan Zamir, Alexander Sax, William B. Shen, Leonidas J. Guibas, Jitendra Malik, and
Silvio Savarese. Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning. CoRR , abs/1804.08328, 2018.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.08328 .
5