Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICLR 2024
VERIFYING PRACTICES OF REGENERATIVE AGRICUL -
TURE : A FRICAN SMALLHOLDER FARMER DATASET
FOR REMOTE SENSING AND MACHINE LEARNING
Yohei Nakayama1, Grace Antwi1, and Seiko Shirasaka2
1Degas Ltd.
2Keio University
ABSTRACT
Despite Africa’s contribution to global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions being
only a few %, the continent experiences the harshest impacts, particularly within
its food production systems. Regenerative agriculture is receiving a large amount
of attention as a method to strengthen both food security and climate change re-
silience in Africa. For practicing regenerative agriculture, carbon credits are is-
sued, but verifying the methodologies on a large scale is one of the challenging
points in popularizing it. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive dataset on
regenerative agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa. The dataset has ﬁeld polygon in-
formation and is labeled with several types of regenerative agriculture methodolo-
gies. The dataset can be applied to local site analysis, classiﬁcation, and detection
of regenerative agriculture with remote sensing and machine learning. We also
highlight several machine learning models and summarize the baseline results on
our dataset. We believe that by providing this dataset, we can contribute to the es-
tablishment of veriﬁcation methods for regenerative agriculture. The dataset can
be downloaded from https://osf.io/xgp9m/.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Regenerative agriculture has received a large amount of attention in recent years as an alternative
means of producing food that may have lower—or even net positive—environmental and/or social
impacts (Newton et al., 2020). Carbon credits are issued for reducing GHG emissions through
regenerative agriculture (Black et al., 2022). Thus, regenerative agriculture is considered a key
to addressing climate change (Olsson et al., 2019). Methodologies of regenerative agriculture are
mainly divided into ﬁve categories: (1) improve fertilizer (organic or inorganic) management, (2)
improve water management/irrigation, (3) reduce tillage/improve residue management, (4) improve
crop planting and harvesting (e.g., improved agroforestry, crop rotations, cover crops), (5) improve
grazing practices (Black et al., 2022). In addition, adding biochar to soil in cropland is also treated
as a methodology capable of issuing carbon credit (Etter et al., 2021). Monitoring and verifying the
methodologies with various approaches such as surveys, use of sensors, on-site soil sampling, and
remote sensing (Wang et al., 2022) are critical parts of the issuance of carbon credits. In particular,
monitoring the practice implementations of regenerative agriculture or subsequent soil improve-
ments through remote sensing and machine learning is receiving attention as it can perform periodic
inspections in a scalable manner (Schreefel et al.; Ogungbuyi et al., 2023). However, open datasets
related to regenerative agriculture are limited, and few provide polygons of each agricultural ﬁeld. In
this paper, we provide a dataset collected through a regenerative agriculture project in sub-Saharan
Africa. The dataset includes ﬁeld polygons of each agricultural ﬁeld, labels of the type of tillage
practiced, whether intercrop with cover crops is performed, and whether biochar is used. In to-
tal, 943 labeled samples are provided. We also applied several machine learning algorithms to the
dataset and summarized the classiﬁcation results.
1Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICLR 2024
2 D ATASET SPECIFICATION
The dataset was collected through a large-scale regenerative agriculture project in sub-Saharan
Africa, particularly Ghana. As depicted in Figure 1, the study sites span the Northern and Up-
per West regions of Ghana. In total, the dataset includes ﬁeld polygons of 938 agricultural ﬁelds.
The latitude and longitude ranges are 11.0 to 9.0 and -0.65 to -2.6, respectively. On the sites, a
combination of multiple types of farming methodologies, including several levels of reduced tillage,
intercropping with maize and cover crops, and adding biochar into the soil, is practiced. Manual
labels of each methodology and date of planting have been provided, which can be used for exam-
ple for classiﬁcation tasks. A summary of the category types and the number of samples for each
category are shown in Table 1. The “None” value in cover crop types means intercropping is not
conducted in the ﬁeld, and only maize is planted. Regenerative agriculture has been conducted on
the sites since 2023, and the date of planting ranges from June 2 to July 30.
Figure 1: Schematic illustration of study sites in Ghana and ﬁeld polygons included in the dataset.
Sample pictures of each regenerative agriculture methodology.
Table 1: An overview of the presented dataset in this paper.
Tillage methods Cover crop types Biochar usage
Conventional 449 Bambara beans 333 True 221
No tillage 235 Pumpkin 181 False 722
Harrowed 111 Cowpea 143
Bullock plough 77 Soybeans 71
Ripping 47 Groundnuts 50
None 160
3 B ASELINES AND EXPERIMENTS
3.1 S ATELLITE OBSERVATION
The polygon information of the provided dataset can be used for local agricultural site analysis by
mapping it with satellite observation data. In this paper, Sentinel-2 observations were used as the
satellite data (Drusch et al., 2012). Observations of the target sites from March to September 2023
were collected, and only those with cloud coverage of 60% or less were extracted. For simplicity,
we used the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) (Tucker, 1979) in this paper, which is
usually referred to as a proxy for vegetation health monitoring (Bell ´on et al., 2017; Nay et al., 2018;
Ayhan et al., 2020). In Sentinel-2, NDVI is calculated from the red and near-infrared bands. As the
ground resolution of both bands is 10 m x 10 m, that of NDVI is also 10 m x 10 m.
2Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICLR 2024
Figure 2: An overview of the collection process of satellite observation data, preprocessing, and
model training.
3.2 P REPROCESSING
After calculating the NDVI values, we performed preprocessing before inputting them into machine
learning models. Since the number of observation data collected and the observation date vary
depending on the sites due to the cloud cover ﬁlter, we used interpolation to unify the number of
observations and observation dates. The 1st and 15th dates of each month from April 15th to August
15th in 2023 are set as the reference dates, which is equivalent to plant and mid-season of Maize in
Ghana. For a total of the 9 reference days, the NDVI value at each pixel was calculated by inter-
polating that from the previous and subsequent observation data. Lastly, we took each polygon of
the dataset and segmented the pixels using the polygon, placing the polygon’s centroid at the center
of a 20 x 20 array of zeros. This array corresponds to an area of 200 m x 200 m from the ground
resolution, and the area of all agricultural ﬁelds is smaller than that. Through this preprocessing,
we created an input dataset where one data shape was 9 (sequence) x 1 (channel) x 20 (width) x 20
(height).
3.3 B ASELINE MODELS
We chose 3 algorithms to provide baselines of the dataset: AutoGluon, LSTM, and ConvLSTM,
which are generally used for cropland mapping (Wang et al., 2022; Ahmad et al., 2023). With
the 3 algorithms, we performed binary classiﬁcation tasks. AutoGluon is an open-source AutoML
framework that automates preprocessing, data splitting, model selection, and ensembling (Erickson
et al., 2020). The base models of Autogluon (tabular task) are trained using bagging and multi-layer
stack ensembling to improve classiﬁcation or regression results. For AutoGluon, before feeding into
the model, which calculates statistical values such as max, min, mean, and standard deviation of
NDVI for each sample, so 9 (sequence) x 4 (statistical values of NDVI) = 36 columns were used as
one input data sample. LSTM is one of the recurrent neural network (RNN) based architectures that
is extensively used for classiﬁcation or regression tasks with time-series satellite observation data
(Tian et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2019). We also perform an additional process for LSTM, which ﬂattens
the input pixel, so 9 sequences of ﬂoat values of 400 dimensions are used as input. The ConvLSTM
is also a type of RNN for spatio-temporal prediction that has convolutional structures in both the
input-to-state and state-to-state transitions (Shi et al., 2015). Unlike the original LSTM architecture,
convolutional operations are used for internal matrix multiplications. Therefore, the module has the
temporal modeling ability of an LSTM but can also capture local features, similar to a convolutional
neural network (CNN). By applying ConvLSTM to the preprocessed data, it is possible to train a
model by considering the distribution of NDVI values over farmland.
4 R ESULT
For the 3 methodologies, we performed binary classiﬁcation tasks with labels that are True/False of
implementation of conventional tillage, intercropping with cover crops and biochar usage. Classify-
ing whether each methodology is practiced on the ﬁeld or not is the same as detecting the practice
of that method. The results of our experiments are summarized in Table 2. We split the datasets
into training/validation with a ratio of 8:2. In AutoGluon, we created a trained model by performing
training with default settings and using the evaluation metric as balanced accuracy. AutoGluon tunes
3Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICLR 2024
Table 2: An overview of the presented dataset in this paper.
Tillage methods
Balanced Accuracy F1 Recall Precision
AutoGluon 0.60 0.64 0.72 0.58
LSTM 0.69 0.71 0.93 0.57
ConvLSTM 0.74 0.60 0.69 0.53
Intercropping
Balanced Accuracy F1 Recall Precision
AutoGluon 0.69 0.71 0.93 0.57
LSTM 0.54 0.48 0.64 0.54
LSTM 0.59 0.57 0.59 0.57
Biochar usage
Balanced Accuracy F1 Recall Precision
AutoGluon 0.74 0.60 0.69 0.53
LSTM 0.65 0.60 0.63 0.65
ConvLSTM 0.71 0.70 0.71 0.70
factors such as hyperparameters, early-stopping, and ensemble-weights in order to improve the eval-
uation metric on validation data. In LSTM and ConvLSTM, downsampling of the majority class is
applied only to the training data to handle the class imbalance, and cross-entropy loss is used as the
loss function. The model with the minimum loss value for the validation dataset during 50-epoch
training is selected as the trained model. Balanced accuracy, F1 score, recall, and precision for the
validation data are calculated using these trained models. For predicting tillage conditions, the max-
imum difference in F1 values between the models is 0.08, which is smaller than the differences in F1
values for other tasks. This suggests that the temporal evolution of NDVI is important in predicting
tillage conditions and that spatial dispersion has little effect. AutoGluon’s results are superior to
others in predicting intercropping. This indicates that intercropping can be estimated just with tem-
poral evaluation in NDVI and using statistical values. On the other hand, the two models that do not
use statistical values but use raw data with high dimensions have lower accuracy. We conjecture that
this is because the number of data samples is less than required to extract essential information for
inference from the high dimensional input features. In predicting the use of biochar, the F1 score of
ConvLSTM was about 0.1 higher than other results. This suggests that spatial dispersion of NDVI
should be considered when predicting the use of biochar. Also, unlike the intercropping prediction,
the fact that ConvLSTM also achieved high accuracy indicates that the number of data samples is
sufﬁcient to extract essential features for predicting the use of biochar from high-dimensional input.
5 C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we provided the ﬁrst substantial dataset on regenerative agriculture and the baseline
classiﬁcation results that come with it. From the results of the experiment, we showed the effective-
ness of the dataset for the detection and classiﬁcation of the various methodologies. In the tillage
condition and biochar usage, the dataset shows almost uniform results for all models. On the other
hand, for intercropping prediction, although learning accuracy can be improved by calculating sta-
tistical values in advance and reducing the input dimension, it is suggested that the number of data
samples is not sufﬁcient when the input dimension is high. For future work, we plan to continually
update the dataset from two perspectives. The ﬁrst is to increase the sample size. The second is
expanding the target sites. The footprint is limited to Ghana in this version, but it is planned to in-
clude the entire sub-Saharan region. Regarding the satellite observation data used, for simplicity, we
only used NDVI calculated from Sentinel-2 observation. The classiﬁcation accuracy of the tasks we
proposed in this paper can be expected to improve by using more comprehensive multispectral ob-
servation data and high ground resolution data such as commercial observation data. In conjunction
with the various types of satellite observations and this dataset, it’s expected to develop state-of-
the-art machine learning models that can contribute to the establishment of veriﬁcation methods for
regenerative agriculture.
4Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICLR 2024
REFERENCES
Rehaan Ahmad, Brian Yang, Guillermo Ettlin, Andr ´es Berger, and Pablo Rodr ´ıguez-Bocca. A
machine-learning based convlstm architecture for ndvi forecasting. International Transactions in
Operational Research , 30(4):2025–2048, 2023.
Bulent Ayhan, Chiman Kwan, Bence Budavari, Liyun Kwan, Yan Lu, Daniel Perez, Jiang Li, Dim-
itrios Skarlatos, and Marinos Vlachos. Vegetation detection using deep learning and conventional
methods. Remote Sensing , 12(15):2502, 2020.
Beatriz Bell ´on, Agn `es B ´egu´e, Danny Lo Seen, Claudio Aparecido De Almeida, and Margareth
Sim˜oes. A remote sensing approach for regional-scale mapping of agricultural land-use systems
based on ndvi time series. Remote Sensing , 9(6):600, 2017.
C Black, C Brummit, N Campbell, M DuBuisson, D Harburg, L Matosziuk, M Motew, G Pinjuv, and
E Smith. Methodology for improved agricultural land management. Available on: https://verra.
org/metho dolog ies/vm0042-metho dology-for-impro vedagric ultur al-land-manag ement-v1-0/.
Accessed , 21, 2022.
Matthias Drusch, Umberto Del Bello, S ´ebastien Carlier, Olivier Colin, Veronica Fernandez, Ferran
Gascon, Bianca Hoersch, Claudia Isola, Paolo Laberinti, Philippe Martimort, et al. Sentinel-2:
Esa’s optical high-resolution mission for gmes operational services. Remote sensing of Environ-
ment , 120:25–36, 2012.
Nick Erickson, Jonas Mueller, Alexander Shirkov, Hang Zhang, Pedro Larroy, Mu Li, and Alexan-
der Smola. Autogluon-tabular: Robust and accurate automl for structured data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.06505 , 2020.
Hannes Etter, Andrea Vera, Chetan Aggarwal, Matt Delaney, and Simon Manley. Methodology for
biochar utilization in soil and non-soil applications. Veriﬁed Carbon Standard , 2021.
John Nay, Emily Burchﬁeld, and Jonathan Gilligan. A machine-learning approach to forecasting
remotely sensed vegetation health. International journal of remote sensing , 39(6):1800–1816,
2018.
Peter Newton, Nicole Civita, Lee Frankel-Goldwater, Katharine Bartel, and Colleen Johns. What is
regenerative agriculture? a review of scholar and practitioner deﬁnitions based on processes and
outcomes. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems , 4:194, 2020.
Michael Gbenga Ogungbuyi, Juan P Guerschman, Andrew M Fischer, Richard Azu Crabbe, Caro-
line Mohammed, Peter Scarth, Phil Tickle, Jason Whitehead, and Matthew Tom Harrison. En-
abling regenerative agriculture using remote sensing and machine learning. Land , 12(6):1142,
2023.
Lennart Olsson, Humberto Barbosa, Suruchi Bhadwal, Annete Cowie, Kenel Delusca, Dulce Flores-
Renteria, Kathleen Hermans, Esteban Jobbagy, Werner Kurz, Diqiang Li, et al. Land degradation:
Ipcc special report on climate change, desertiﬁcation, land 5 degradation, sustainable land man-
agement, food security, and 6 greenhouse gas ﬂuxes in terrestrial ecosystems. In IPCC special
report on climate change, desertiﬁcation, land 5 degradation, sustainable land management, food
security, and 6 greenhouse gas ﬂuxes in terrestrial ecosystems , page 1. Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC), 2019.
Loekie Schreefel, Rachel E Creamer, Hannah HE van Zanten, Evelien M de Olde, Annemiek
Pas Schrijver, Imke de Boer, and Rogier PO Schulte. How to monitor the ‘success’ of (regen-
erative) agriculture: A perspective. Available at SSRN 4525658 .
Xingjian Shi, Zhourong Chen, Hao Wang, Dit-Yan Yeung, Wai-Kin Wong, and Wang-chun Woo.
Convolutional lstm network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems , 28, 2015.
Ziheng Sun, Liping Di, and Hui Fang. Using long short-term memory recurrent neural network in
land cover classiﬁcation on landsat and cropland data layer time series. International journal of
remote sensing , 40(2):593–614, 2019.
5Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICLR 2024
Huiren Tian, Pengxin Wang, Kevin Tansey, Jingqi Zhang, Shuyu Zhang, and Hongmei Li. An
lstm neural network for improving wheat yield estimates by integrating remote sensing data and
meteorological data in the guanzhong plain, pr china. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology , 310:
108629, 2021.
Compton J Tucker. Red and photographic infrared linear combinations for monitoring vegetation.
Remote sensing of Environment , 8(2):127–150, 1979.
Yu Wang, Han Liu, Lingling Sang, and Jun Wang. Characterizing forest cover and landscape pattern
using multi-source remote sensing data with ensemble learning. Remote Sensing , 14(21):5470,
2022.
6