1 
 Indigenous Knowledge Aware Drought Monitoring , Forecasting and  
Prediction using Deep  Learning Techniques  
Kidane W oldemariyam  
Haramaya University  
Department of Computer Science  
P. O. Box: 138, Haramaya, Ethiopia  
kidane.woldemariyam@haramaya.edu.et  
1. Introduction  
Drought is a natural environmental hazard causing adverse impacts on vegetation, animals, and people. It can be 
defined as a deficiency  of rainfall or increase of evapotranspiration over a prolonged period of time . In recent years, 
it has occurred  frequently in all climate  zones and significantly affect ing crop yields and causing a shortage of food 
as well as animal forage. As stated  in [1], drought can be categorized as agricultural, hydrological, meteorological,  
and socioeconomic droughts . The first three deal with the mechanisms of measuring drought as a physical 
phenomenon, while the last deals with drought in terms of supply and demand following shortage of rainfall [2 ]. In 
Ethiopia, m ore than 80 percent of people rely on agriculture and livestock for their livelihoods. Most of the  population 
substantial ly dependent on rain -fed agriculture and the country’s economy is extremely vu lnera ble to the impacts of 
drought  [21]. Thus, among all extreme climate events, drought is considered as the most complex phenomenon 
affecting the country  due to the variable nature of climate condition  and the absence  of effective technology -oriented 
climate change early warning system s at the national  level . As per the report from the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), yet the increasing frequency and magnitude of climate disasters and plant 
pests over the years have left m any communities particularly vulnerable to food insecurity [20]. Consecutive seasons 
of poor rainfall in southern and southeastern pastoral areas of Ethiopia have severely limited feed and water availability 
and significant livestock losses have driven ris ing food insecurity and malnutrition rates, which are largely a 
consequence of insufficient and underfunded livelihoods response.  
Through time, due to the frequent nature of drought in Ethiopia, indigenous peoples and local communities with a 
long history  of interaction with the environment have dealt with climate changes and extreme drought events  using 
indigenous knowledge . As a result , this knowledge can be important plus  to develop a system that guides the 
community by adapting the daily activities of the co mmunity itself towards climate  mitigation and risk minimization 
[12, 13]. This can also be considered as the usage of local knowledge with the idea of “local -solution s for local -
problem s”. As indicated in the report, “Realizing the Future We Want”, the United Nation System Task Team on the 
Post 2015 UN Development Agenda, acknowledges the importance of indigenous knowledge for environmental 
sustainability [11] stating t hat “traditional and indigenous knowledge, adaptation and coping strategies can be major 
assets for local response strategies”. The importance of indigenous peoples’ contribution in the adaptation to climate 
change is also acknowledged in the Assessment Re port (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), which identifies indigenous and traditional knowledge as a “major resource for adapting to climate change”.  
Studies carried out so far also stress the importance of indigenous knowledge i n the development by talking about the 
idea of “development from below” [3]. Through their research illustrating the utility of indigenous knowledge, these 
scholars attempted to raise awareness among policymakers about the importance of bottom -up perspecti ves to create 
a more  locally appropriate and environmentally sustainable solutions. This is also an issue that was re -affirmed in the 
International Indigenous Peoples’ Forum on Climate Change (IIPFCC). Besides this recognition, very little attention 
has be en given by machine learning experts in order to integrate indigenous knowledge for climate change mitigation 
strategies.  
In this natural hazard, s ignificant hydrol ogical components such as storm , rainfall, stream flow, soil moisture, and 
evaporation are substantially random in their beha vior, accordingly, climate change experts try to quantify it using  
probability, statistics, and at -large stochastic approaches  oriented tools . Nowadays, development of drought 
monitoring , forecasting  and prediction system have been achieved in many continents  and countries [4] . For instance, 
in United State s [5], a drought monitoring system  which has a goal of tracking and displaying the magnitude and 
spatial extent of drought and its impacts across the States is already mo delled and classifies drought into five classes 
named as moderate, severe, extreme, exceptional, and abnormal drought using  six drought indicators . Moreover, other 
researchers  have also conducted  drought monitoring for other continents [6, 7 , 8, 9].  However, due to , variable 
characteristics  of drought  from region to region  [10, 16], limited data set size, limited consideration of valuable local 
knowledge related to climate change mitigations  and block -box nature of current model  development and 
impleme ntation of regional and country -level monitoring and prediction model s is very crucial  for drought monitoring.  2 
 Therefore , in order to cope with drought at an early stage  and minimize its impacts , transfer learning based indigenous 
knowledge -aware drought modeling and prediction using deep learning techniques is a solution  that creates  an 
intelligent model  for drought monitoring, forecasting and prediction . So that, different concerned bodies and 
stakeholders can respond to drought occurrences in a better and more precise manner using locally grounded 
technological solution  that takes into account the localized nature of this phenomenon. This way of modelling will 
also be used in preserving indigen ous knowledge and sharing drought features at training and prediction of explainable 
drought monitoring artificial intelligent systems  from reasonable size of data set .  
2. Motivation and Statement of the Problem  
Issue of drought is great  agenda for both developed and developing countries and its impact is higher  when it occurs 
in developing countries like Ethiopia due to the fact that the majority of the population depend on rain -fed agriculture  
using the traditional way of farming . Yet while there is a growing interest in modeling drought monitoring and 
prediction; designing a locally grounded , accurate  drought modelling and prediction model for agriculture dependent 
countries requires special considerations with integration of indigenous knowledge and modern scientific methods, so 
that the people -centered drought modelling  and prediction can empower people at the local level by incre asing their 
sense of ownership on technological advancement s on climate change  mitigation . As also stated in [15], indigenous  
knowledge could be used, in combination with scientific knowledge, in the co -production of new knowledge useful 
to orient more locally grounded adaptation and mitigation strategies . Thus, by considering this beneficial usage of 
indigenous knowledge and benefits of drought model ling and drought impact minimization lagging behind in Ethiopia, 
“Indigenous Knowledge and Deep Learning for Climate Change ” has to  be used as a flag towards perform ing an 
intelligent task on behalf of human beings (drought experts)  related to drought monitoring and prediction  with the 
integration of local knowledge  in a way that solves large dataset requirement and black box nature of current modelling  
with integration of certain and structured indigeno us knowledge graph (ontology) . Moreover, the random and 
nonlinear nature of drought variables also makes accurate drought predictions remain a challenging scientific problem. 
Therefore, w hile current globally motivated drought models can help to predict ch anges in long -term trends, the 
accuracy of these models also needs to be improved and at the same time , it has to be localized by considering the 
local behavior of the drought .  
3. Objective  
The general objective of this proposed research work  is to design deep learning based hybrid  comprehensive 
framework  for drought monitoring , forecasting  and prediction using scientific  and i ndigenous knowledge of drought. 
In order to realize the stated general objective, the following specific objectives are identified:  
 To assess drought monitoring , forecasting  and predi ction techniques and approaches;  
 To define the requirements for drought monitoring , forecasting  and prediction;  
 To model indigenous knowledge -driven knowledge base of drought;  
 To select an appropriate approach, techniques, and tools  for drought monitoring , forecasting  and prediction;  
 To propose a comprehensive architecture for drought monitoring , forecasting  and prediction model;  
 To develop  and evaluate  hybrid drought monitoring , forecasting  and predict ion model.  
4. Methods   
For the purpose of this work, design science research methodology [18] will be adopted, it consists of six steps: 
problem identification and motivation, objectives of the solution, design and development, demonstration, evaluation 
and communication.  The primary data of this research will be collected through questionnaires, interviews and 
opinionnaires while the secondary data will be collected from the meteorological station of the govern ment, online 
satellite imagery , spatial data pro vider, reliable online data providers and other online climate datasets. I n order to 
gather drought -related data, purposive or expert sampling will be used in which samples are expressly chosen in the 
light of available information by maximizing relevant r epresentation based on prior knowledge from different  climate 
change sta keho lders in Ethiopia. The controls in such samples are usually identified as representative areas, 
representative characteristics of individuals, or types of groups (farmer, pastorali st, environmental -expert etc.). 
Besides , this sampling is also used for the selection of geographical area and villages under the st udy site (i.e., 
Ethiopia).  Deep learning based drought modeling with knowledge base integration will be used as a method of 
modeling [18, 19 , 24] following the neural networks that have shown great promise over the last two decades in 
modeling nonlinear time series because deep learning uses multilayer processing that provides better accuracy as in 
resemblance with state -of-the-art algorithm  as indicated in Figure 1 . In addition to this, information about hydrologic 
processes and behaviors between basins, time and unobserved locations will also be transferred using the neural 
network techniques for time series and adoption the r ecent excitement of deep neural networks and transfer learning 3 
 [23] is promising to uncover relationships in nonlinear data  of drought modeling .  Planet’s Python Client, Rasterio, 
Sentinelsat, Geopandas, and ARCGIS will be used for satellite image analysis and processing. Python programming 
language will be used to develop the model and as a machine learning tool, keras gpu version  with tensor -flow backend 
will b e used following the recent ease  model  development  through  better computational capabilities . 
 
Figure 1: Comprehensive Architecture of Indigenous Knowledge aware Drought Monitoring Forecasting and Prediction using Deep Learning Te chniques  
5. Study Site  
Ethiopia is located in the Horn of Af rica within 3 –15°N and 33 –48°E, it is the study site of this proposed research 
work. Ethiopia is selected as the case study catchment because the reiterated and extreme weather events pose 
challenges to the main agricultural sector  of the country . Thus, studying Ethiopi c perspective of drought monitoring 
and prediction  in line with the continental and global climate change is vital for sustainable development . As a result, 
continenta l and global drought prediction data  for model generalization and transfe r learning  will also be used from 
different data sources , including: Ethiopian Meteorological Agency, Climate Research Unit (CRU) Rainfall Data, 
Early Warning and Response Directorate (EWRD), Data for S ustainable Development Goals ( www.data4sdgs.org ), 
Satellite and Weather D ata ( www.tuhoma.org ), Ethiopian Space Science and Technology Institute (ESSTI) , 
GIDMaPS, African Flood and Drought Monitoring Archive and S entine l Satellite I mage 
(https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/ ). 
6. Expected Outputs  and Beneficiaries  
Successful completion of this research provides drought prediction and monitoring model that creates a platform for 
drought -related decision making with  different expected outcomes , including drought -driven indigenous knowledge 
model that has to be integrated with a scientific model for drought monitoring, prediction and mitigation best practices  
[17, 18]. Drought risk identification model, drought monitoring model, drought preparedness model, drought 
forecasting model, drought mitigation model and post drought best practices recommendation model are expected 
outputs of this research work by integrating indigenous and scientific knowledge. As stated in [22], approximately 
three million Ethiopians are affected by crop prod uction shortfalls adding to the 7.6 million supported every year by 
the Productive Safety Net Program for some of Ethiopia’s poorest and most food -insecure families because of extreme 
drought and the outputs of this work has direct benefits of reducing thi s loss. Thus, the expected output s of this work 
shall  minimize the high impact of weather events related to drought [16] by having state of the art  transfer learning 
based indigenous knowledge aware drought monitoring and prediction system for more than 10  million populations 
in Ethiopia. As a result, t he short and  long-term beneficiaries of this proposed work are: the government and its various 
agriculture and weather -related sectors by improving their drought -related preparedness to increase resilience to  
drought impacts; citizens and the general public by reducing famine risks and ensures continuity of economic activities 
to the extent possible during drought periods; and policymakers by having evidence of drought and other interrelated 
concerns in policy -making .  
7. Conclusion  
To summarize, this proposed research work integrates connectionist and symbolic artificial intelligence in order to 
create locally grounded comprehensive, explainable intelligent model for drought monitoring forecasting and 
prediction.  Therefore, using this approach it is possible to create an improved and explainable model from reasonable 
size dataset with integration of structured indigenous knowledge.  
4 
 References  
[1] Donald A.Wilhite and Michael H. Glantz. "The Drought Phenomenon:  The Role of Definitions" Water International , 
Vol 10, no. 3 , 111 -120, 1985.  
[2] Abraha  M. “Assessment of Drought Early Warning in Ethiopia: A Comparison of WRSI by Surface Energy Balance 
and Soil Water Balance. ” University of Twente Faculty of Geo -Information and Earth Observation  (ITC), 2013.  
[3] Warren, D. Michael, and Kristin Cashman.  “Indigenous Knowledge for Sustainable Agriculture and Rural 
Development .” International Institute for Environment and Development, Sustainable Agriculture Programme , 1988.  
[4] Mercer, Jessica. "Disaster Risk Reduction or Climate Change Adaptation: Are We Reinventing the Wheel?."  Journal 
of International Development: The Journal of the Development Studies Association  22, no. 2 (2010): 247 -264. 
[5] Svoboda, Mark, Doug LeComte, Mike Ha yes, Richard Heim, Karin Gleason, Jim Angel, Brad Rippey et al. "The 
Drought Monitor."  Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society  83, no. 8 (2002): 1181 -1190.  
[6] Acácio, Vanda, Joaquín Andreu, Dionysis Assimacopoulos, Carlo Bifulco, Alessandro di Carli, Susana Dias, Eleni 
Kampragou "Review of Current Drought Monitoring Systems and Identification of (further) Monitoring 
Requirements."  DROUGHT -R&SPI Technical Report  6 (2013).  
[7] Sepulcre -Canto, G., S. M. A. F. Horion, A. Singleton, H. Carrao, and J. Vogt. "Development of a Combined Drought 
Indicator to Detect Agricultural Drought in Europe."  Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences  12, no. 11 (2012): 
3519 -3531.  
[8] Trenberth, Kevin E ., Aiguo Dai, Gerard Van Der Schrier, Philip D. Jones, Jonathan Barichivich, Keith R. Briffa, and 
Justin Sheffield. "Global Warming and Changes in D rought." Nature Climate Change  4, no. 1 (2014) . 
[9] Funk, C., Andrew Hoell, Shraddhanand Shukla, Ileana Blade, B rant Liebmann, Jason B. Roberts, Franklin R. 
Robertson, and G. H usak. "Predicting East African Spring D roughts us ing Pacific and Indian Ocean Sea Surface 
Temperature I ndices." Hydrology and Earth System Sciences  18, no. 12 (2014): 4965 -4978.  
[10] Brewer, Michae l, R. R. Heim, Will Pozzi, Juergen Vogt, and Justin Sheffield. "The Global Drought Monitor Portal -
The Foundation for a Global Drought Early Warning System." In AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts.  2011.  
[11] García -del-Amo, David, P. Graham Mortyn, and Vic toria Reyes -García. "Including Indigenous and Local Knowledge 
in Climate Research: An Assessment of the Opinion of Spanish C limate Change R esearchers."  Climatic 
Change  (2020) : 1-22. 
[12] Boillat, Sébastien, and Fikret Berkes. "Perception and Interpretation of Climate Change Among Quechua Farmers of 
Bolivia: Indigenous Knowledge as a Resource for Adaptive C apacity."  Ecology and Society  18, no. 4 (2013).  
[13] Hiwasaki, Lisa, Emmanuel Luna, and José Adriano Marçal. "Local and Indigenous Knowledge on Climate -Related 
Hazards of Coastal  and Small Island C ommunities in Southeast Asia."  Climatic Change  128, no. 1 -2 (2015): 35 -56. 
[14] Fernández‐Llamazares, Álvaro, and Mar Cabeza. "Rediscovering the Potential of Indigenous Storytelling for 
Conservation P ractice."  Conservation Letters  11, no. 3 (2018) . 
[15]  Berkes Fikret. "Environmental Governance for the Anthropocene? Social -Ecological S ystems , Resilience, and 
Collaborative L earning." Sustainability 9 , no. 7 (2017) . 
[16] Huntingford, Chris, Elizabeth S. Jeffers, Michael B. Bonsall, Hannah M. Christensen,  Thoma s Lees, and Hui Yang. 
"Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence to Aid Climate C hange Research and P reparedness."  Environmental 
Research Letters  14, no. 12 (2019) . 
[17] International Resource Panel, United Nations Environment Programme. Sustainable Co nsumption, and  Production 
Branch.  Decoupling Natural Resource use and E nvironmental  Impacts from Economic G rowth. UNEP/Earthprint , 
2011.  
[18] Rasp, Stephan, Michael S. Pritch ard, and Pierre Gentine. "Deep Learning to Represent Subgrid Processes in Climate 
Models."  In the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  115, no. 39 (2018): 9684 -9689.  
[19] Ardabili, Sina, Amir Mosavi, Majid Dehghani, and Anna mária R. Várkonyi -Kóczy. "Deep Learning and Machine 
Learning in Hydrological Processes Climate Change and Earth Systems a Systematic R eview." In International 
Conference on Global Research and Education , pp. 52 -62. Springer, Cham, 2019.  
[20] http://www.fao.org/emergencies/countries/detail/e n/c/151593 , Access Date:  February  1, 2020.  
[21] http://www.un -spider.org/news -and-events/news/un -spider -strengthens -use-space -data-drought -early -warning -
ethiopia  , Access Date:  February  1, 2020.  
[22] Asaminew Teshome and Jie Zhang. "Increase of Extreme Drought over Ethiopia under Climate Warming." Advances 
in Meteorology 2019 (2019).  
[23] Sun, Qianru, Yaoyao Liu, Tat -Seng Chua, and Bernt Schiele. "Meta -Transfer L earning for few -shot L earning." In 
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 403 -412. 2019.  
[24] Giuseppe F. and Antonio V., "On the Integration of Knowledge Graphs into Deep Learning Models for a More 
Comprehensible AI —Three Challenges for Future Research", Information 2020, 11, 122; doi:10.3390/info11020122.  