Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
ASIMPLIFIED MACHINE LEARNING BASED WILDFIRE
IGNITION MODEL FROM INSURANCE PERSPECTIVE
Yaling Liu, Son Le, Yufei Zou, Mojtaba Sadeghi
Kettle Reinsurance
83 Norwood Ave, Kensington
Kensington, California, USA
yaling@ourkettle.comYang Chen
Department of Earth System Science
University of California
Irvine, California, USA
Pierre Gentine
Dept. Earth & Environmental Engineering
Columbia University
New York, USANiels Andela
Cardiff University
Cardiff CF10 3AT, UK
ABSTRACT
In the context of climate change, wildfires are becoming more frequent, intense,
and prolonged in the western US, particularly in California. Wildfires cause catas-
trophic socio-economic losses and are projected to worsen in the near future. In-
accurate estimates of fire risk put further pressure on wildfire (re)insurance and
cause many homes to lose wildfire insurance coverage. Efficient and effective
prediction of fire ignition is one step towards better fire risk assessment. Here
we present a simplified machine learning-based fire ignition model at yearly scale
that is well suited to the use case of one-year term wildfire (re)insurance. Our
model yields a recall, precision, and the area under the precision-recall curve of
0.69, 0.86 and 0.81, respectively, for California, and significantly higher values of
0.82, 0.90 and 0.90, respectively, for the populated area, indicating its good per-
formance. In addition, our model feature analysis reveals that power line density,
enhanced vegetation index (EVI), vegetation optical depth (VOD), and distance to
the wildland-urban interface stand out as the most important features determining
ignitions. The framework of this simplified ignition model could easily be applied
to other regions or genesis of other perils like hurricane, and it paves the road to a
broader and more affordable safety net for homeowners.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Wildfires have caused many fatalities and are devastating large regions, with far-reaching impacts
on the environment, ecosystems, climate and human health[1]. In California, wildfires have been in-
creasing for decades, driven by climate-change-induced warming and decreases in precipitation[2].
Furthermore, land and fire management have exacerbated the hazards[3]. Finally, population and
socioeconomic growth, particularly at the wildland-urban interface, has dramatically increased the
exposure of communities to wildfires and expanded the fire niche into regions and seasons with wet-
ter fuels that are less conducive to fire activity[3-6]. The combined result of accelerating wildfire
risk is clearly visible in California, which experienced enormously damaging fires in 2017, 2018
and 2020. In 2018 alone, the total damage due to wildfires in California amounted to approximately
$148.5 billion ( about 1.5% of California’s annual GDP) [2].
While insurers are suffering from a surge in homeowner insurance claims for wildfires, reinsurers
in California had raised their prices by 600% during 2015-2020 to make up for lost profits and
rising risks[7], due to an over self-correction and inadequate assessment of fire risks. As a result, the
passed through expenses of reinsurance have made insurance unaffordable for many homeowners
in California. These increased premiums may also exacerbate financial pressures on residents. The
California Department of Insurance (CDI) reported a 6% increase in insurer-initiated homeowner
policy non-renewals between 2017 and 2018[8].
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Recent years have seen significant progress in wildfire risk assessment framework [9-12], wherein
ignition is a critical component. For ignition component of those frameworks, it usually either ran-
domly sample ignitions within a Fire Planning Unit (FPU) [9, 13], which are organized to address
fire suppression over a geographic area and divided by region (e.g., California currently has 21 Fire
Planning Units), or just sample ignitions relying on historical observations[11, 12]. Next, all the
sampled ignitions, will be fed into a separate spread model for wildfire spread simulations. After-
wards, wildfire simulations will be used to calculate burn probabilities, and then will be combined
with exposures and building vulnerabilities to estimate wildfire risks. Nonetheless, the ignition
component is not adequately represented within those earlier frameworks. Specifically, randomly
sampling within a FPU ignores the spatial heterogeneity of ignition propensity within a particular
FPU, and sampling solely based on historical ignition observations may cause no or inadequate sam-
pling in areas without historical ignitions but are still prone to have ignitions in the future. Either
of above cases will cause significant biases or uncertainties in ignitions, which will be cascaded to
downstream components and will undermine the final wildfire risk assessment. Therefore, a better
representation of the ignition component is imperative.
In light of surging wildfire (re)insurance prices which put many homes under non-renewal risk, an
accurate estimate of wildfire risks is essential for affordable (re)insurance for homeowners and in-
surance carriers. In addition, from a (re)insurer’s perspective, the risk estimation should be practical
in business and agile in production. To meet those pressing and practical needs, here we present a
simplified machine learning (ML) based ignition model, which is a critical component of our wild-
fire risk assessment framework that is currently used for the wildfire (re)insurance in California. We
model the ignition probability in a simplified manner at yearly scale, as opposed to daily or monthly
scale, mainly for practical reasons. First, a (re)insurance policy is typically written or renewed for a
one-year term, so an annual estimate of wildfire risk is good from (re)insurance perspective. Thus,
there is no pressing needs to model ignition at monthly or daily scale from this regard. Second,
more than 80% of wildfire ignitions in the US are caused by human activities[3], suggesting that
fast-changing natural factors such as weather may play a less important role in ignitions. Mean-
while, the anthropogenic factors used in our model (Table A2 in the Appendix), which are used
as proxies for human activities, do not change rapidly at seasonal scale (e.g., population density,
distance to the wildland-urban interface), thus yearly data would be sufficient to approximate their
gradual changes. Third, from operational perspective, building, maintaining, and refining a ML-
based yearly scale model is more easy, lightweight and agile for production and operation. In this
work, we mainly elaborate how we build the model (Section 2) and how well the model performs in
California (Section 3), and we conclude with final takeaways (Section 4).
2 M ETHODS AND DATA
2.1 M ETHODS
2.1.1 B ASELINE APPROACH
Based on historical ignition observations, we build the baseline model by using frequency of ignition
occurrence. Specifically, we first split the training and testing data (i.e., ignition observations) in a
temporally continuous manner (see details in Section A1 of the Appendix). If the average ignition
frequency during the training stage is ≥1ignition per year within a grid, then during the testing
stage it is assumed that grid will continue to have ignition occurrence every year. On the other hand,
those grids with ignition frequency <1 ignition per year during the training stage will be assumed
to have no ignition occurrence during testing. The historical frequency of ignition occurrence during
the training stage (1992-2014) is shown in Figure A1 of the Appendix.
There are two caveats for the baseline approach. First, the predicted ignitions will be static for the
testing period and the future, any inter-annual variability in ignitions will not be captured. This
could cause significant bias in wildfire risk assessment, especially when climate change is ever-
increasing and is projected to intensity in the future[14]. Second, since this approach is solely
based on historical observations of ignition occurrence, there is no way to understand what factors
determine ignition occurrence with this approach, which is critical in actual practices of wildfire
(re)insurance underwriting.
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
2.1.2 M ACHINE LEARNING APPROACH
To address the two abovementioned caveats of the baseline model, and also to potentially improve
the baseline model, the extreme gradient boost (XGBoost[15]) machine learning method is intro-
duced to model the yearly ignition probability across California at a spatial resolution of 0.1-degree.
We frame the task as a classification problem, and the learning objective of the XGBoost model
uses logistic regression for binary classification and outputs ignition probability, where the logistic
loss is used as the loss function. The model treats fire ignition as target: if there is an observed fire
ignition in a grid for a specific year, then the target will be class 1, if not the target will be class 0.
The XGBoost model takes the input data (see Section 2.2) and predicts the ignition probability for
each grid cell in each year of the historical period 1992-2020. A probability threshold of 0.5 is used
to decide if the model predicts a fire ignition (when probability is ≥0.5) or not (when probability
is<0.5). The training and testing data split and hyper parameter tuning are detailed in Section A1
and A2 of the Appendix, respectively.
Note that the ignition probability here is not “natural” probability that directly represents the proba-
bility of fire ignition occurrence from a statistics perspective, but rather a term to indicate the spatial
variability in ignition propensity from a relative aspect. In other words, we only use the ignition
probability as a reference for ignition sampling at spatial locations in our simulation framework,
i.e., grids with higher probability will be sampled more often. By doing so, the spatial variations in
ignition propensity is well captured, which is an improvement to ignition component of some earlier
wildfire risk assessment frameworks which just randomly sample ignitions within a FPU[9, 13] or
just rely on historical observations[11, 12]. Therefore, despite the caveat of being not a “natural”
probability, the practicality in the use case of wildfire risk assessment for (re)insurance justifies the
existence and success of our simplified ML-based ignition model.
2.2 D ATA
We have conducted careful feature engineering and extensive literature review to deploy available
data that best suit the problem of ignition modeling. For the data source of wildfire ignitions, we use
the FPA FOD dataset developed by the US Forest Service[16], which collects and compiles ground
truth ignition data from different agencies from 1992-2020. It is the most comprehensive and up-
to-date wildfire ignition data source, including fires of all sizes across the states. In our use case,
we only use the ignition data for wildfires in California. The input features of the model include
biogeophysical and anthropogenic drivers of fire ignition [17-19], classified into the following four
categories: 1) climate; 2) vegetation; 3) topography; and 4) anthropogenic factors. The detailed
input variables, temporal aggregation and data sources are listed in Table A2 of the Appendix. The
preparation of all data is documented in Section A3 of the Appendix.
3 R ESULTS
3.1 E VALUATIONS OF THE BASELINE MODEL
The baseline model is evaluated on the testing set which spans from 2015 to 2020. The evaluation
presents a precision, recall, and area under precision-recall curve (AUC-PR) of 0.73, 0.75 and 0.74
(see Figure A2 in the Appendix), respectively. Note that from the perspective of (re)insurance,
usually a higher recall is more desirable, this is because the miss detection of wildfires may cause
catastrophic financial loss to the (re) insurers and they would try to avoid it. In this context, the
recall of the baseline model could be further improved by seeking alternative approaches.
3.2 E VALUATIONS OF THE ML- BASED IGNITION MODEL
With the same training and testing period, the ML-based ignition model reports a precision of 0.69
and a recall of 0.86, with an AUC-PR of 0.81 (see Figure A3a in the Appendix), suggesting a good
performance of the ignition model even for the extreme years such as 2017, 2018 and 2020 when
wildfire intensity is high. With a much higher recall and overall better performance (as indicated by
higher AUC-PR), the ML-based ignition model is clearly more desirable than the benchmark model.
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
In addition, we also trained an ignition model in the same way but only with data from the populated
area (with population density ≥10km2). We conduct this additional experiment because, from a
wildfire (re)insurance perspective, the insured is usually home properties. Thus, it is the populated
areas that matter most, although ignitions in unpopulated areas could spread to populated areas. We
find that the precision, recall, and AUC-PR of the populated-area-only model are 0.82, 0.90, and
0.90, respectively (see Figure A3b in the Appendix), significantly higher than those of the model for
the entire California. This is probably because wildfire ignitions are disproportionally more located
in populated area. Based on the FPA FOD dataset[16], 60% of the ignitions occur in the populated
area (population density ≥10/km2) which only accounts for ∼1/4 of California territory. Thus, the
ignition model for the populated area tends to have relatively more training sample and the model
could learn the ignition mechanisms better. Nonetheless, for complete spatial coverage, we still
present results from the ignition model for the entire California in following sections.
3.3 F EATURE IMPORTANCE ANALYSIS
Figure 1: Feature importance of the ML-based ignition
model. EVI=enhanced vegetation index, VOD= vegetation
optical depth, RH=relative humidity, VPD=vapor pressure
deficit, PDSI=Palmer Drought Severity Index, ssr =surface
shortwave radiation, Tair= air temperature, land1 = ever-
green needleleaf forests. See Table A2 in Appendix for full
description of all features.To better understand which input fea-
tures dominate wildfire ignitions, we
conduct feature importance analy-
sis for the ML-based ignition model
of the entire California based on
the SHapley Additive exPlanations
(SHAP) value[20]. The analysis re-
veals that the top six important fea-
tures are power line density, en-
hanced vegetation index (EVI), veg-
etation optical depth (VOD), dis-
tance from wildland-urban interface
(wui-distance), vapor pressure deficit
(VPD) and relative humidity (RH)
(Figure 1). While power line den-
sity and WUI-distance are proxies for
intensity of human-related activities,
EVI and VOD reflect the vegetation
biomass and vegetation water con-
tent, respectively, and VPD and RH
represent atmospheric aridity and hu-
midity, respectively. These results are
in line with earlier studies on the key
drivers of human activities, fuels and
moisture deficit [3, 17, 18, 21, 22].
3.4 S PATIOTEMPORAL
VARIATIONS
IN IGNITION PROBABILITIES
The ignition probabilities across Cal-
ifornia vary from area to area due
to differences in natural and anthro-
pogenic features like weather, topog-
raphy, land cover, population density,
etc., presenting distinct spatial patterns (Figure 2a-b). The ignition probabilities are relatively low in
the sparsely populated areas such as the desert area in southeast California, and in agricultural areas
of the Central Valley, due to low vegetation density or relatively low human activities. On the other
side, the ignition probabilities are much higher in the densely populated areas such as the coastal
region of California, especially the southern coast, and the east of the Central Valley, due to intense
human activities. The ignition probabilities in the northern mountain area are in-between, mostly
driven by lightning and dense vegetation[17]. These spatial patterns align with earlier studies[17].
Although the spatial patterns of ignition probabilities seem similar from year to year, the probabili-
ties still present clear inter-annual variabilities in both magnitudes and spatial patterns. Specifically,
4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
more devastating wildfire years present overall higher ignition probabilities (e.g., 2018 vs. 2012 in
Figure 2). In addition, some areas tend to change more drastically in ignition probabilities than other
areas (e.g., Figure 2c). Apparently, the inter-annual differences in their spatial patterns (Figure 2c)
will result in differences in spatial sampling of wildfire ignitions for different years in our wildfire
risk assessment framework, which may lead to significant implications for the outcome of wildfire
risk assessment for different years.
Figure 2: Modeled ignition probabilities in 2018 (a) and 2012 (b) and their differences (c) in Cali-
fornia.
4 C ONCLUSIONS
In light of the escalating frequency, intensity and extent of wildfires in the Western US and their
subsequent catastrophic socioeconomic impacts, efficient and accurate estimation of fire ignitions is
imperative for any preventive measures of wildfire risk. Wildfire (re)insurance provides a safety net
for potential wildfire induced loss to homeowners, which is critical in safeguarding home properties
and socioeconomic stability. At the same time, the nature of randomness in wildfire ignitions poses
great challenge to the modeling of wildfire ignitions. To strike a balance among model complexity,
performance, and practicality for (re)insurance, we use a simplified ML-based ignition model at
yearly scale in our (re)insurance business, which is easy-to-build, lightweight, efficient, and has
been proven to work well in wildfire (re)insurance in California. In addition, this framework could
be easily applied to other regions, and to other perils such as hurricanes, which involve similar
processes (genesis and moving track) like wildfires (genesis and contagion). The ignition model
will continue to be refined (see Section C in the Appendix) to best support our wildfire (re)insurance
activities, and in turn will help provide a broader and more affordable safety net for homeowners.
5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
References
[1] World Meteorological Organization (WMO). ”Drought and heat exacerbate wildfires,”
01/24/2023.
[2] D. Wang, D. Guan, S. Zhu, M. Mac Kinnon, G. Geng, Q. Zhang, H. Zheng, T. Lei, S. Shao, and
P. Gong, “Economic footprint of California wildfires in 2018,” Nature Sustainability , vol. 4, no. 3,
pp. 252-260, 2021.
[3] J. K. Balch, B. A. Bradley, J. T. Abatzoglou, R. C. Nagy, E. J. Fusco, and A. L. Mahood,
“Human-started wildfires expand the fire niche across the United States,” Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences , vol. 114, no. 11, pp. 2946-2951, 2017.
[4] H. A. Kramer, M. H. Mockrin, P. M. Alexandre, S. I. Stewart, and V . C. Radeloff, “Where wild-
fires destroy buildings in the US relative to the wildland–urban interface and national fire outreach
programs,” International journal of wildland fire , vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 329-341, 2018.
[5] H. A. Kramer, M. H. Mockrin, P. M. Alexandre, and V . C. Radeloff, “High wildfire damage
in interface communities in California,” International journal of wildland fire , vol. 28, no. 9, pp.
641-650, 2019.
[6] V . C. Radeloff, D. P. Helmers, H. A. Kramer, M. H. Mockrin, P. M. Alexandre, A. Bar-Massada,
V . Butsic, T. J. Hawbaker, S. Martinuzzi, and A. D. Syphard, “Rapid growth of the US wildland-
urban interface raises wildfire risk,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 115, no.
13, pp. 3314-3319, 2018.
[7] J. Kauflin, ”Fintech’s Wildfire Fighter: This Reinsurer Is Using A.I. To Make California Insur-
ance Affordable,” Forbes , Forbes, 2020.
[8] CDI, ”New Data Shows Insurance is Becoming Harder to Find as a Result of Wildfires,” Cali-
fornia Department of Insurance Press, 2019.
[9] D. E. Calkin, A. Ager, M. P. Thompson, M. A. Finney, D. C. Lee, T. M. Quigley, C. W. McHugh,
K. L. Riley, and J. M. Gilbertson-Day, “A comparative risk assessment framework for wildland fire
management: the 2010 cohesive strategy science report,” 2011.
[10] J. H. Scott, M. P. Thompson, and D. E. Calkin, “A wildfire risk assessment framework for land
and resource management,” 2013.
[11] E. J. Kearns, D. Saah, C. R. Levine, C. Lautenberger, O. M. Doherty, J. R. Porter, M. Amodeo,
C. Rudeen, K. D. Woodward, and G. W. Johnson, “The construction of probabilistic wildfire risk
estimates for individual real estate parcels for the contiguous United States,” Fire, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
117, 2022.
[12] J. Scott, K. Short, and M. Finney, “FSim: The Large Fire Simulator Guide to Best Practices,”
Pyrologix LLC. Available online: https://pyrologix.com/wp-content/uploads/
2019/11/FSimBestPractices_0 , vol. 3, 2018.
[13] M. A. Finney, C. W. McHugh, I. C. Grenfell, K. L. Riley, and K. C. Short, “A simulation of
probabilistic wildfire risk components for the continental United States,” Stochastic Environmental
Research and Risk Assessment , vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 973-1000, 2011.
[14] V . Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C. P ´ean, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y . Chen,
L. Goldfarb, and M. Gomis, “Climate change 2021: the physical science basis,” Contribution of
working group I to the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change,
vol. 2, 2021.
[15] T. Chen, and C. Guestrin, ”Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system.” pp. 785-794.
[16] K. C. Short, “Spatial wildfire occurrence data for the United States, 1992-2020
[FPA FOD 20221014],” 2022.
[17] B. Chen, and Y . Jin, “Spatial patterns and drivers for wildfire ignitions in California,” Environ-
mental Research Letters , vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 055004, 2022.
6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
[18] N. Faivre, Y . Jin, M. L. Goulden, and J. T. Randerson, “Controls on the spatial pattern of
wildfire ignitions in Southern California,” International Journal of Wildland Fire , vol. 23, no. 6, pp.
799-811, 2014.
[19] G. Di Virgilio, J. P. Evans, S. A. Blake, M. Armstrong, A. J. Dowdy, J. Sharples, and R. McRae,
“Climate change increases the potential for extreme wildfires,” Geophysical Research Letters , vol.
46, no. 14, pp. 8517-8526, 2019.
[20] S. M. Lundberg, and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,” Advances
in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[21] A. P. Williams, R. Seager, M. Berkelhammer, A. K. Macalady, M. A. Crimmins, T. W. Swetnam,
A. T. Trugman, N. Buenning, N. Hryniw, and N. G. McDowell, “Causes and implications of extreme
atmospheric moisture demand during the record-breaking 2011 wildfire season in the southwestern
United States,” Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology , vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 2671-2684,
2014.
[22] F. Sedano, and J. Randerson, “Vapor pressure deficit controls on fire ignition and fire spread in
boreal forest ecosystems,” Biogeosciences Discussions , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1309-1353, 2014.
[23] F. Mesinger, G. DiMego, E. Kalnay, K. Mitchell, P. C. Shafran, W. Ebisuzaki, D. Jovi ´c, J.
Woollen, E. Rogers, and E. H. Berbery, “North American regional reanalysis,” Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Meteorological Society , vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 343-360, 2006.
[24] J. T. Abatzoglou, “Development of gridded surface meteorological data for ecological applica-
tions and modelling,” International Journal of Climatology , vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 121-131, 2013.
[25] R. E. Orville, “Development of the national lightning detection network,” Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Meteorological Society , vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 180-190, 2008.
[26] D. Sulla-Menashe, and M. A. Friedl, “User guide to collection 6 MODIS land cover (MCD12Q1
and MCD12C1) product,” Usgs: Reston, Va, Usa , vol. 1, pp. 18, 2018.
[27] L. Moesinger, W. Dorigo, R. de Jeu, R. van der Schalie, T. Scanlon, I. Teubner, and M. Forkel,
“The global long-term microwave vegetation optical depth climate archive (VODCA),” Earth System
Science Data , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 177-196, 2020.
[28] Z. Jiang, A. R. Huete, K. Didan, and T. Miura, “Development of a two-band enhanced vegeta-
tion index without a blue band,” Remote sensing of Environment , vol. 112, no. 10, pp. 3833-3845,
2008.
[29] J. J. Danielson, and D. B. Gesch, “Global multi-resolution terrain elevation data 2010
(GMTED2010),” 2011.
[30] V . Radeloff, M. Dubinin, N. Coops, A. Allen, T. Brooks, M. Clayton, G. Costa, C. Graham, D.
Helmers, and A. Ives, “The dynamic habitat indices (DHIs) from MODIS and global biodiversity,”
Remote Sensing of Environment , vol. 222, pp. 204-214, 2019.
7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Appendix
A IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
In this part, we provide supplementary materials for the methods and data used in this work.
A.1 T RAINING AND TESTING DATA SPLIT
We split the training and testing set with a ratio of 80% and 20% for the historical period of 1992-
2020 across California, i.e., the first 80% of the time series of 1992-2020 (including both input and
target data) are used for training and the remaining are used for testing. Here we do it in a temporal
continuous manner rather than shuffling the training data, because we want the model to be able to
capture the trend of increasing wildfire frequency and intensity in California in latest years. If the
model performs well during the test set period (2015-2020), it suggests that the model captures that
trend well. This will help in a case if future extreme climate tends to be more frequent and intense.
A.2 H YPER PARAMETER TUNING
We use the Python package Hyperactive for hyperparameter tuning, and five-fold cross validation is
used to avoid over-fitting. The tuned hyperparameters and optional values for each hyper parameter
are listed in Table A1. Recall is used as the scoring metric for hyperparameter tuning because we
need to best avoid false negative, in which case the model fails to predict a real fire and then it may
result in catastrophic loss to the (re)insurer. The best set of hyper parameters is selected by choosing
the one that achieves the highest recall during cross-validation, and they are also listed in Table A1.
Table A1: Hyperparameters and corresponding options for tuning, and final selected value after
tuning (please see documentation at https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/ for description
of each hyperparameter)
Hyperparameter Option values Selected value
nestimators 200, 300, 400, 500 500
max depth 3, 5, 6, 8, 10 8
min child weight 2, 3, 4 2
learning rate 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 0.1
gamma 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 0.2
subsample 0.6, 0.8, 1 0.8
colsample bytree 0.6, 0.8, 1 0.8
regalpha 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 0.1
A.3 D ATA PREPARATION
The spatial domain of this study is California, and we prepare the data in a spatial resolution of 0.1-
degree at grid level, with a total of 4432 grids in California. All the related data are processed to 0.1-
degree and yearly scale, except those static input variables are kept static along time. Specifically,
for any data that are finer than 0.1-degree spatial resolution (or yearly temporal resolution), they
are aggregated to 0.1-degree (or yearly average or yearly total as shown in Table A2). For data
that are coarser than 0.1-degree, the nearest neighbor is used to obtain 0.1-degree gridded data.
For data that have coarser temporal resolution than yearly, linear interpolation is used for period
when data are available, and the nearest neighbor is used for period when data are unavailable. In
addition, categorical input data, specifically land cover type, are transformed to binary using one-
hot encoding. For continuous input data, they are scaled using standard scaler function in sklearn
package before feeding into the ignition model.
B S UPPLEMENTARY RESULTS
The supplementary figures A1, A2 and A3 are included in this section.
8Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Figure A1. Spatial distribution of historical frequency of ignition occurrences during 1992-2014.
Figure A2. Precision-recall curve of the baseline model for entire California. AUC = area under
curve.
C L IMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
C.1 L IMITATIONS
The randomness of wildfire ignitions, complexity in causes, and limited historical wildfire records
make estimating the “natural” probability of wildfire ignitions challenging. Constrained by that chal-
lenge and the limitations of the XGBoost method itself, a caveat of the ignition probability derived
by our simplified ignition model is that it is not “natural” probability which directly represents the
probability of fire ignition occurrence from statistics perspective. Nonetheless, the spatial variations
of the ignition probabilities from our ignition model are used as a reference for spatial sampling of
ignitions, which is the main purpose of this simplified ignition model and it well suits our wildfire
simulation framework in our practical use case of wildfire (re)insurance. In addition, the possible
omission or redundancy of wildfire ignitions in the FPA FOD dataset could cause potential biases
in our model results.
9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Figure A3. Precision-recall curve of the ignition model for entire California (a) and the populated
area (b). AUC = area under curve.
C.2 F UTURE WORK
Future and ongoing work includes but not limited to: 1) examining the mechanisms of big fire
(≥1000 ha) and small fire ( <1000 ha) ignitions; 2) adding more observations of fire ignitions from
different sources across the US; 3) finding and adding more related data like nearest distance to
power line, secondary properties of power line (e.g., intensity of poles, quality and age of power
lines) to the ignition model.
10Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Table A2: Wildfire ignition data and input features for the ML-based wildfire ignition model
Category variables Temporal aggregation Data sources
Wildfires ignitions yearly total (binary, if total >0 treat
it as 1, otherwise 0)FPA FOD[16]
Climate air temperature (Tair) yearly mean NARR (North America Regional Reanalysis)[23]
precipitation (precip) yearly total NARR (North America Regional Reanalysis)[23]
surface solar radiation (ssr) yearly mean NARR (North America Regional Reanalysis)[23]
relative humidity (RH) yearly mean NARR (North America Regional Reanalysis)[23]
wind speed (wind speed) yearly mean NARR (North America Regional Reanalysis)[23]
Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) yearly mean GRIDMET[24]
lightning strike density (lightning) yearly total NLDN[25]
Vegetation land cover type (land0 to land15, representing 16
different types)static MCD12C1[26]
vegetation optical depth (VOD) yearly mean VODCA[27]
enhanced vegetation index (EVI) yearly mean EVI2[28]
Topography elevation (elevation) static GMTED2010[29]
Anthropogenic power line density (power linedensity) static California Public Utilities Commission
population density (population density) static within a year, changing yearly SILVIS Lab[30]
average housing unit density (house density) static within a year, changing yearly SILVIS Lab[30]
fraction of area classified as wildland-urban inter-
face – interface (wui interface)static within a year, changing yearly SILVIS Lab[30]
distance from wildland-urban interface (wui dist) static within a year, changing yearly SILVIS Lab[30]
distance to nearest camp (camp dist) static US Campground Directory
number of campgrounds (camp num) static US Campground Directory
11