Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
UNCOVERING THE SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL VARI-
ABILITY OF WIND RESOURCES IN EUROPE : A W EB-
BASED DATA-MINING TOOL
Alban Puech
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Palaiseau, France
alban.puech@polytechnique.eduJesse Read
Laboratoire d’informatique de l’ ´Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
jesse.read@lix.polytechnique.edu
ABSTRACT
We introduce REmap-eu.app, a web-based data-mining visualization tool of the
spatial and temporal variability of wind resources. It uses the latest open-access
dataset of the daily wind capacity factor in 28 European countries between 1979
and 2019 and proposes several user-configurable visualizations of the temporal
and spatial variations of the wind power capacity factor. The platform allows for
a deep analysis of the distribution, the cross-country correlation, and the drivers
of low wind power events. It offers an easy-to-use interface that makes it suitable
for the needs of researchers and stakeholders. The tool is expected to be useful in
identifying areas of high wind potential and possible challenges that may impact
the large-scale deployment of wind turbines in Europe. Particular importance
is given to the visualization of low wind power events and to the potential of
cross-border cooperations in mitigating the variability of wind in the context of
increasing reliance on weather-sensitive renewable energy sources.
1 I NTRODUCTION
As the world is facing an unprecedented energy crisis, more and more investments are going into
intermittent renewable energy sources (IRES). IRENA’s (2019) analysis forecasts wind power to
represent 40 percent of the EU-28 electricity needs in 2050. As energy production depends more
and more on weather conditions, there is a call for tools that could help in better understanding and
dealing with the risks that this can present. Wind variability poses a significant challenge to energy
production, as it can lead to fluctuations in power output, making it difficult to manage energy supply
(Staffell & Pfenninger, 2018). Therefore, understanding the historical variability of wind power is
essential to make well-informed decisions regarding the future deployment and management of wind
turbines. One solution to the problem of wind variability is cross-border cooperation, which allows
countries to share their wind resources and balance out variations in power output. In January 2023,
the European Commission called for cross-border renewable energy projects (European Climate
Infrastructure and Environment Executive Agency, 2023), and more and more attention is given to
the study of the existing and the future necessary regulations, policies, and incentives (Aras, 2021;
Ecofys and eclareon, 2023; EEA, 2020; Kerres et al., 2020). However, to effectively implement
cross-border cooperation, a deep understanding of the spatial and temporal distribution of wind
energy in different countries and regions is needed. This is where data-mining visualization tools
can play a crucial role by providing an intuitive and interactive way to explore and analyze wind
data from different regions, helping to identify patterns, trends, and potential issues that would be
difficult to discern from raw data alone.
In this paper, we present a dashboard-like data-mining interface that aims at making the historical
spatial and temporal variability of wind power more accessible to decision-makers. We also hope
to bridge the gap between the available climate data and the needs of the energy industry look-
ing for a more intelligible analysis tool that: (1) Uses the latest open-access dataset of the daily
wind capacity factor in 28 European countries between 1979 and 2019; (2) Proposes more than
16 fully-configurable visualizations of the temporal (intraday, intrayear, year-over-year), and spa-
tial variations of the wind power capacity factor; (3) Allows a deep analysis of the distribution, the
1Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
cross-country correlations of the temporal distribution, and the drivers of low wind power events of
different European countries.
We expect the platform to be useful to (1): Researchers seeking visual representations of the his-
torical variability of wind power, the possible obstacles to the reliability of a power supply system
highly relying on wind, and more generally to the large-scale integration of wind power into the
grid; provide stakeholders (2) with valuable insights into the potential of countries for wind energy
development, as well as the potential for regional cooperation and help them make well-informed
decisions.
2 D ATASET ,DEVELOPMENT AND DEPLOYMENT SPECIFICS
Dataset. The dataset used here is an ERA5-derived time series of European country-aggregate elec-
tricity wind power generation (Bloomfield et al., 2020). The authors use the ERA5 reanalysis data
(Hersbach et al., 2020) to compute the nationally aggregated hourly capacity factor of 28 European
countries between 1979 and 2019. The capacity factor of a wind turbine is the ratio of the electrical
energy produced by the turbine for the period of time considered to the total amount of electrical
energy that could have been produced at full power operation during the same period. Further details
regarding the data are given in appendix A1.
Software Framework. Our platform is built using Dash, a python library built on top of React.js that
allows building data applications with perfect integration of Plotly.js. Dash was made popular for
its use in bioinformatics database visualization (Shammamah Hossain, 2019). Dash uses callbacks
to modify or add new HTML elements as a result of the user’s action. The platform is accessible at:
REmap-eu.app
Interactive Two-Card-Layout. The layout of the web application is based on two cards, placed
side-by-side. Fig. 1 in the Appendix shows a screenshot of the platform. Each card groups together
elements that interact with each other. Hence, each of the two cards is independent, with a unique
exception: The choropleth map of the left card is used to filter the countries plotted on the right
card. The left card displays ‘raw’ data, with little pre-processing involved. It provides a simple
yet clear description of the spatial and temporal distribution of the capacity factor. The right card
provides more elaborated visualizations, that require more pre-processing. Those visualizations are
to be interpreted with the data shown on the left card. The layout was designed to allow the two
plots to be side by side, so that the user does not need to switch between them.
3 V ISUALIZATIONS FOR THE SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL ANALYSIS OF WIND
POWER
In this section, we introduce the different visualizations describing the spatial and temporal variabil-
ity of wind energy. Appendix A2 gives a summary of the proposed plots and their settings.
Analysing the spatial distribution of wind resources in Europe. European countries are not equal
in terms of wind resources (Enevoldsen et al., 2019). We use a choropleth map [1] of the country-
aggregated capacity factors to highlight the spatial distribution of wind power. We aim at providing
an easy way to compare the average and the standard deviation of the capacity factor of European
countries, for different time resolutions and over different time periods. The map shows the average
and standard deviation of the capacity factor of each European country. This type of visualization is
often used to show how different geographic entities compare. The settings available to the user are
summarized in Appendix A2 and Fig. 2 shows a possible configuration of such a map.
Comparing the temporal distribution of wind resources across countries. We display a line plot
of the capacity factor [2] below the choropleth map. The role of the line plot is to show the intraday,
intrayear, and yearly capacity factor variations of European countries, depending on what resolution
the user chose. It also allows comparison of the capacity factor across countries, over different time
windows. The average capacity factor over all 28 European countries available is displayed, and the
line is labeled as “28C”. This allows the user to compare a country with the Europe-aggregated data,
or compare multiple countries, as shown in Fig. 3.
2Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
Intrayear and intraday wind resources variability. The “Intrayear variation range of the monthly
capacity factor” bar plot [3] displays the variation range of the monthly capacity factor of each
country, as shown in Fig. 4. The same plot is provided for the intraday variation range of the hourly
capacity factor. Understanding seasonal patterns in historical data can help in building more effective
forecast models, which in turn allows for more accurate planning and management of the grid. This
knowledge can also be used to develop more effective policies and strategies for integrating wind
energy into the grid (Kaspar et al., 2019) and maximizing its potential benefits. For example, if
hybrid energy systems based on solar and wind are often assumed to better deal with the variability
of renewable energies, Mahmud et al. (2022) showed that in some countries, solar and winter may
not complement each other as well. This is the case when wind production does not increase during
the winter, and as a consequence, does not compensate for the drop in solar energy production.
Cumulative time above threshold comparison. One way to compare the capacity factor of dif-
ferent regions is to look at their proportion of days that had a capacity factor higher than some
threshold. This is what can be done using the “Cumulative days above threshold” plot [5]. The plot
supports multi-country selection, in which case a line corresponding to the data aggregated over the
entire selected region is added, as in Fig. 5. Again, this allows the user to consider the selected
countries as a single unique region in the context of perfect grid interconnection.
Year-over-year monthly capacity factor comparison. So far, the visualizations were focusing on
the spatial distribution of wind power, and on the comparison of capacity factor-derived features
across countries. However, the increasing investments into wind energy have pushed for more re-
search on the year-over-year country-scale evolution of wind energy resources (Jung & Schindler,
2022). The long-term evolution of wind resources is important for the calculations used in the pre-
liminary assessment of energy-producing projects, such as the levelized cost of energy (LCOE). In
the “YoY (year-over-year) monthly capacity factor comparison” plot [6], we display the intra-year
evolution of the capacity factor for the selected country and the selected year. The lines correspond-
ing to the other years of the period 1979-2019 are displayed in gray, allowing the user to compare
the capacity factor of a given year to the other years of the period. This is shown in Fig. 6.
4 A NALYZING LOW WIND POWER EVENTS : FREQUENCY ,DRIVERS AND
MITIGATION STRATEGIES
Unlike solar PV , which exhibits relatively predictable diurnal and seasonal cycles, wind power has
more complex and irregular variations in energy generation, both at inter-annual and intra-annual
scales. In particular, the study of the temporal distribution of low-wind-power (LWP) events has
gained more attention in the literature (Cai & Br ´eon, 2021; Ohlendorf & Schill, 2020). LWP events
are becoming a growing concern in countries where wind power makes up a significant portion
of the energy mix, as it raises questions about energy security and stability. Studying the past
occurrences of these events can provide valuable insights into the drivers of variability and inform
the development of strategies to mitigate their impact. Although there is not a single definition of
low wind power events, they can be defined as an uninterrupted period of time during which the
capacity factor is below some threshold (Patlakas et al., 2017; Leahy & Mckeogh, 2013; Ohlendorf
& Schill, 2020). In our web app, we arbitrarily set this threshold to 10 percent. This is a value that
will be modifiable by the users in the next version of the platform.
Comparing the number, the duration, and the distribution of low wind power events. When the
user selects “LP events” in the dropdown, two plots are displayed. The first one is a bar plot of the
number of occurrences of low wind power events for different minimum durations. The second one
is a calendar plot that indicates the low wind power days in the selected region. When the user selects
multiple countries, the bar chart displays grouped bars corresponding to each country. This allows
for comparing the number of occurrences of LWP events of each minimum duration across selected
countries. We also add the data corresponding to the selected-region-aggregated data. This allows
the user to see how grid interconnection mitigates the risk of observing LWP events, as shown in Fig.
7. Indeed, a selected region often has a lower number of LWP events than each of its constitutive
countries, since LWP events don’t necessarily happen at the same time in all constitutive countries.
The calendar plot indicates the low wind power days at the scale of the selected region. This plot
gives information on the temporal distribution of those days within the considered year. An example
of such plots is shown in Fig. 8.
3Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
Cross-country correlation of the low wind power day temporal distribution. The previous plots
that we described allow the user to compare countries in terms of their number of LWP events.
However, understanding how the capacity factors of neighboring countries are correlated is of major
importance to determine the interconnection level that could help in alleviating the spatial variability
of wind energy (Olauson & Bergkvist, 2016; Monforti et al., 2016; Malvaldi et al., 2017). For
example, by understanding the patterns and trends of low wind power events in different countries,
it may be possible to identify the most appropriate market mechanisms, such as interconnection
capacities, pricing schemes, and balancing mechanisms, that can enable cross-border cooperation.
For this reason, we propose two different choropleth maps. Both of them require one country to
be selected on the left card. The first plot shows the Pearson correlation coefficient between the
selected country and the other countries in terms of LWP day distribution, see Fig.9. The second
one shows the same statistics, but for the raw capacity factor values. Only statistically significant
(p-value ≥0.05) correlations are displayed.
Detecting the possible drivers of low wind power events. Climate indices provide a measure of
large-scale atmospheric circulation and weather conditions that impact wind resources. For instance,
the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) is one of the most commonly studied climate indices that
has a positive correlation with wind power in Europe (Brayshaw et al., 2011; Ely et al., 2013).
We incorporate a plot of the historical climate indices during low wind speed events, providing a
valuable tool for examining the relationship between climate indices and wind generation. It can help
to identify the indices that are most correlated with wind generation. This historical information can
be used to develop more accurate models for predicting wind power generation. The plot shows the
climate indices for the selected year and highlights the values corresponding to low wind power days
in the selected country, as shown in Fig. 10. The user can select the climate index to display among
the North Atlantic Oscillation index (NAO), the Artic Oscillation index (AO), the Madden-Julian
Oscillation indices (MJO) for different longitudes, and the El-Ni ˜no Southern Oscillation (NINO).
5 A DDITIONAL FEATURES
Electricity prices. It is important to consider the interplay between wind power, electricity prices,
and other factors in order to develop a comprehensive understanding of the energy market. Low
wind power days can have a significant impact on electricity prices. When wind power generation
decreases, other sources of electricity, such as fossil fuels or hydropower, need to ramp up production
to compensate. This can result in an increase in electricity prices, as those energy sources typically
have a variable cost, contrary to wind and solar which have no fuel or variable O&M costs. We
propose a plot of the daily average day-ahead electricity prices, shown in Fig 11. We highlight the
prices corresponding to low wind power days and display the correlation between low wind power
events and electricity prices, which is found to be high for European countries that heavily rely on
this energy source. The price data is obtained from Ember Climate (2023).
Solar energy data. Combining wind and solar energy has gained interest as a way to mitigate their
intermittency and variability, creating a more reliable and stable energy mix. The platform proposes
the user to compare different renewable energy mixes by choosing the weights given to solar and
wind energy in the computation of the capacity factor data displayed in the visualizations. The
solar capacity factor data is also obtained from Bloomfield et al. (2020). By default, only the data
corresponding to wind energy (respective weights of 1 and 0 for wind and solar) is displayed, and
we only focused on the visualizations obtained using this setting in this paper.
6 C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a new web platform that offers multiple visualizations of the temporal and
spatial variability of historical wind energy resources over Europe. The tool proposes configurable
plots that allow the user to deeply analyze the ERA5-derived capacity factor dataset (Bloomfield
et al., 2020). Although we primarily expect this platform to be useful to climate researchers, the
energy industry, and the decision-makers, we also hope to serve the needs of machine learning
engineers and scientists looking for a better understanding of the wind energy resource assessment
challenges. We plan on continuously improving the platform based on the feedback that we have
already received from academics and stakeholders who were introduced to the tool. Specifically, we
4Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
will add the demand data. This will allow the study of the relationship between electricity demand
and wind production. We also plan on adding the demand-net-wind, the electricity demand that
needs to be covered by another energy source than wind.
7 A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Naveen Goutham for his help in correcting the last version of the paper. We also thank
Dr. Hannah Bloomfield and Prof. Emmanuel Pietriga for their insights and suggestions to improve
the platform.
REFERENCES
Melis Aras. Territorial Governance of EU Cross-Border Renewable Energy Cooperation: A Soluble
or Turbulent Model in the Current Framework? Global Energy Law and Sustainability , February
2021. doi: 10.3366/gels.2021.0048.
Hannah Bloomfield, David Brayshaw, and Andrew Charlton-Perez. Era5 derived time series of eu-
ropean country-aggregate electricity demand, wind power generation and solar power generation:
hourly data from 1979-2019, 2020.
Hannah Bloomfield, David Brayshaw, David Brayshaw, Paula Gonzalez, Paula Gonzalez, and An-
drew Charlton-Perez. Sub-seasonal forecasts of demand and wind power and solar power gen-
eration for 28 european countries. Earth System Science Data , 13:2259–2274, 05 2021. doi:
10.5194/essd-13-2259-2021.
David James Brayshaw, Alberto Troccoli, Rachael Fordham, and John Methven. The impact of large
scale atmospheric circulation patterns on wind power generation and its potential predictability: A
case study over the uk. Renewable Energy , 36(8):2087–2096, 2011. ISSN 0960-1481. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2011.01.025. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960148111000474.
Yiling Cai and Franc ¸ois-Marie Br ´eon. Wind power potential and intermittency issues in the context
of climate change. Energy Conversion and Management , 240:114276, 2021. ISSN 0196-8904.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2021.114276.
Ecofys and eclareon. Cross-border renewables cooperation, Jan 2023. URL https://www.agora-
energiewende.de/en/publications/cross-border-renewables-cooperation/.
EEA. Cross-border cooperation on renewable energy, Dec 2020. URL https://www.eea.europa.eu/
themes/energy/renewable-energy/cross-border-cooperation-on-renewable-energy.
Caroline R. Ely, David J. Brayshaw, John Methven, James Cox, and Oliver Pearce. Implications
of the north atlantic oscillation for a uk–norway renewable power system. Energy Policy , 62:
1420–1427, 2013. ISSN 0301-4215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.06.037. URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421513005223.
Ember Climate. European wholesale electricity price data, Jan 2023. URL https://ember-climate.
org/data-catalogue/european-wholesale-electricity-price-data/.
Peter Enevoldsen, Finn-Hendrik Permien, Ines Bakhtaoui, Anna-Katharina von Krauland, Mark Z.
Jacobson, George Xydis, Benjamin K. Sovacool, Scott V . Valentine, Daniel Luecht, and Gregory
Oxley. How much wind power potential does europe have? examining european wind power
potential with an enhanced socio-technical atlas. Energy Policy , 132:1092–1100, 2019. ISSN
0301-4215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2019.06.064.
European Climate Infrastructure and Environment Executive Agency. 2023 call for
cross-border renewable energy projects (cb res) to obtain the status, Jan 2023. URL
https://cinea.ec.europa.eu/news-events/news/cef-energy-2023-call-cross-border-renewable-
energy-projects-cb-res-obtain-status-2023-01-10 en.
5Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
Hans Hersbach, Bill Bell, Paul Berrisford, Shoji Hirahara, Andr ´as Hor ´anyi, Joaqu ´ın Mu ˜noz-Sabater,
Julien Nicolas, Carole Peubey, Raluca Radu, Dinand Schepers, Adrian Simmons, Cornel Soci,
Saleh Abdalla, Xavier Abellan, Gianpaolo Balsamo, Peter Bechtold, Gionata Biavati, Jean Bidlot,
Massimo Bonavita, Giovanna De Chiara, Per Dahlgren, Dick Dee, Michail Diamantakis, Rossana
Dragani, Johannes Flemming, Richard Forbes, Manuel Fuentes, Alan Geer, Leo Haimberger,
Sean Healy, Robin J. Hogan, El ´ıas H ´olm, Marta Janiskov ´a, Sarah Keeley, Patrick Laloyaux,
Philippe Lopez, Cristina Lupu, Gabor Radnoti, Patricia de Rosnay, Iryna Rozum, Freja Vamborg,
Sebastien Villaume, and Jean-No ¨el Th ´epaut. The era5 global reanalysis. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society , 146(730):1999–2049, 2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.3803.
IRENA. Future of wind: Deployment, investment, technology, grid integration and socio-economic
aspects (A Global Energy Transformation paper). Technical report, International Renewable En-
ergy Agency, 2019.
Christopher Jung and Dirk Schindler. Development of onshore wind turbine fleet counteracts climate
change-induced reduction in global capacity factor. Nature Energy , 7, 07 2022. doi: 10.1038/
s41560-022-01056-z.
Frank Kaspar, Michael Borsche, Uwe Pfeifroth, J ¨org Trentmann, Jaqueline Dr ¨ucke, and Paul Becker.
A climatological assessment of balancing effects and shortfall risks of photovoltaics and wind
energy in germany and europe. Advances in Science and Research , 16:119–128, 07 2019. doi:
10.5194/asr-16-119-2019.
Pia Kerres, Bastian Lotz, Felix von Bl ¨ucher, Fabian Wigand, Naida Taso, Jasmina Trhulj, and
Dirk Buschle. Policy brief: Renewables cross-border cooperation in the energy commu-
nity, Nov 2020. URL http://aures2project.eu/2020/11/25/policy-brief-renewables-cross-border-
cooperation-in-the-energy-community/.
Paul Leahy and Eamon Mckeogh. Persistence of low wind speed conditions and implications for
wind power variability. Wind Energy , 16, 05 2013. doi: 10.1002/we.1509.
Zabir Mahmud, Kenji Shiraishi, Mahmoud Youssef Abido, Dev millstein, Pedro Perez, and Sarah
Kurtz. Geographical variability of summer- and winter-dominant onshore wind. Journal of Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy , 14, 03 2022. doi: 10.1063/5.0070430.
A. Malvaldi, S. Weiss, D. Infield, J. Browell, P. Leahy, and A. M. Foley. A spatial and temporal
correlation analysis of aggregate wind power in an ideally interconnected europe. Wind Energy ,
20(8):1315–1329, 2017. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.2095.
F. Monforti, M. Gaetani, and E. Vignati. How synchronous is wind energy production among eu-
ropean countries? Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 59:1622–1638, 2016. ISSN
1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.318.
Nils Ohlendorf and Wolf-Peter Schill. Frequency and duration of low-wind-power events in ger-
many. Environmental Research Letters , 15, 08 2020. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/ab91e9.
Jon Olauson and Mikael Bergkvist. Correlation between wind power generation in the european
countries. Energy , 114:663–670, 11 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2016.08.036.
Wendy S. Parker. Reanalyses and observations: What’s the difference? Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society , 97(9):1565 – 1572, 2016. doi: 10.1175/BAMS-D-14-00226.1.
Platon Patlakas, George Galanis, Dimitris Diamantis, and George Kallos. Low wind speed events:
persistence and frequency. Wind Energy , 20, 06 2017. doi: 10.1002/we.2078.
Shammamah Hossain. Visualization of Bioinformatics Data with Dash Bio. In Chris Calloway,
David Lippa, Dillon Niederhut, and David Shupe (eds.), Proceedings of the 18th Python in Sci-
ence Conference , pp. 126 – 133, 2019. doi: 10.25080/Majora-7ddc1dd1-012.
Iain Staffell and Stefan Pfenninger. The increasing impact of weather on electricity supply and
demand. Energy , 145:65–78, 2018. ISSN 0360-5442. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.
12.051.
6Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
A A PPENDIX
A.1 A1 - D ATASET
The authors of the dataset (Bloomfield et al., 2020) used by the platform use the ERA5 reanal-
ysis data (Hersbach et al., 2020) to compute the nationally aggregated hourly capacity factor of
28 European countries between 1979 and 2019. Reanalysis combines past weather observations
and current atmospheric models to generate climate and weather historic data (Parker, 2016). It
allows getting a complete weather record from sparse - both in space and time - past data. In addi-
tion to the wind speed data, the authors use the wind farm spatial distribution of 2017, taken from
https://thewindpower.net. However, it is worth mentioning that, because the absolute wind power
capacity is not used to compute the capacity factors, only the relative spatial distribution of wind
turbines is assumed to be constant. The capacity factor of each country is estimated by aggregating
the capacity factor computed for each grid box, weighted by its estimated installed capacity. The
capacity factor in each grid box is derived using the 100 m wind speeds and the power curve of
the type of wind turbine maximizing the energy produced during the entire period (1979-2019), as
indicated in (Bloomfield et al., 2021). Although the authors reported an average percentage error of
10 percent in the validation settings, it is important to note that capacity factors indicated here may
deviate from the true values.
7Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
A.2 A2 - S UMMARY OF THE VISUALIZATIONS DESCRIBED IN SECTION 3
Description User interaction Comments
[1] Choropleth map
of the average or
standard deviation of
the hourly, monthly
or yearly capacity
factor- The right dropdown
sets the data resolu-
tion (yearly, monthly,
or hourly).
- The left dropdown
allows switching be-
tween average and std
of the capacity factor
- The slider filters the
year, month or hours
included in the data- The Average and standard deviation are com-
puted over the entire time period (1979-2019),
except if the time resolution is set to yearly, in
which case the user can decide what years to in-
clude
[2] Line plot of the
intraday, intrayear or
yearly average capac-
ity factor- The countries dis-
played on the plot
are those selected
when clicking on
the choropleth map
(holding shift allows
multi-selection)
- The range slider can
then be used to filter the
time period that is dis-
played- When no country is selected (initial state), the
average capacity factor over all 28 European
countries available is displayed, and the line is
labelled as “28C”
[3] Bar plots of the
Intrayear/intraday
variation range of
the monthly/ hourly
capacity factor- The dropdown lo-
cated on the top part of
the card is used to se-
lect the year of the data
to be shown
- The countries dis-
played on the plot
are those selected
when clicking on
the choropleth map
(holding shift allows
multi-selection)- When no country is selected on the left card,
all European countries are plotted, in ascending
order of values. This is because the goal of this
visualization is to provide a ranking of the coun-
tries based on their capacity factor variability
- The scale starts at 0 for the difference in bar
heights to accurately represent the difference in
capacity factor variation range.
- The color used for each country is consistent
across all visualizations of the web app, allowing
the user to quickly spot the selected countries on
each plot
[4] Plot of the mini-
mum, maximum and
average intraday/ in-
trayear capacity fac-
toras in 3. - The scatter plot displays the mean with a cross
and the min and max values with error bars
- The countries are ordered by mean values
[5] Line plot of the
cumulative days
above capacity factor
thresholdas in 3. Moreover :
- When multiple coun-
tries are selected, an
additional line corre-
sponding to the se-
lected region (average
over all selected coun-
tries) is displayed- When no country is selected, the data for the
28 countries-aggregated capacity factor is dis-
played, and the lines corresponding to each Eu-
ropean country are displayed in light gray. This
allows the user to quickly see how each country
compares to the other 27 European countries by
hovering over its corresponding line
[6] YoY (year-over-
year) monthly capac-
ity factor plotas in 4. - As the goal here is really to compare the in-
trayear capacity factor over the years for a sin-
gle region, selecting multiple countries results in
showing only one single line corresponding to
the data aggregated over the entire selected re-
gion
- The lines corresponding to the other years of
the period 1979-2019 are displayed in light gray,
allowing the user to quickly figure out how the
capacity factor of a given year compares to the
other years of the period
8Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
A.3 A3 - FIGURES AND USE -CASES EXAMPLES
Figure 1: Layout of the web app. The left card shows the choropleth map [1] and the line plot [2] of
the capacity factor, while the right one offers more advanced visualizations. The choropleth map of
the left card is used to filter the data plotted on the right card.
Figure 2: Choropleth map [1] of the average yearly capacity factor over the period 1984-2019. The
range slider and the two dropdowns are used to parametrize the visualization.
Figure 3: Line plot [2] showing the average monthly capacity factor of France, the UK, and the
average capacity factor over the 28 European countries (28C) for the period 1979-2019. The scale
starts at 0 to allow a better comparison between countries. The user selects the countries to be
displayed by clicking on the choropleth map [1] shown in Fig. 2 and sets the time resolution using
the dropdown shown in Fig. 1.
9Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
Figure 4: Bar chart of the intrayear variation range of the monthly capacity factor of the 28 countries
in 1979. The bar corresponding to the 28 countries-aggregated capacity factor range is shown in red.
This chart helps in identifying countries that suffer from a large capacity factor gap between high
and low wind power months.
Figure 5: Line plot of the cumulative days above thresholds for the year 1979. We display the data
for France and Denmark, and the data aggregated over the region (France+Denmark) in blue. When
neighboring countries are connected, excess energy from windy regions can be transferred to regions
with less wind, reducing the need for reserve capacity. In practice, this can lead to an increase in the
overall capacity factor of wind power in the interconnected system.
10Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
Figure 6: Year-over-Year monthly capacity factor comparison for France, The highlighted year is
2018. The gray lines correspond to the other years of the period (1979-2019). 2018 showed a
particularly low wind production during summer (note how the height of the green line compares to
the gray lines).
Figure 7: Number of low wind power events in France, Germany, and in the entire
(France+Germany) region for different minimum LWP events duration in 1979. Interconnected
countries have a tendency to experience fewer low wind power events due to the ability of one coun-
try to compensate for the other’s low capacity factor, particularly when they have distinct coastal
regions and are exposed to varying wind patterns. Grid interconnections generally enhance the reli-
ability of energy supply.
11Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
Figure 8: Calendar plots of the low wind power days in France (top figure), and in the region
(France+Germany) in 2018. Low wind power days are displayed in red. The observation is similar
to the one made about Fig. 7.
Figure 9: Correlation between the LWP events distribution of France and the ones of the 28 other
European countries.
12Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2023
Figure 10: Line plot of the NAO climate index in 2018. The red dots correspond to low wind power
days in the selected country (here, France). After having identified a low wind power event using
the calendar plot shown in Fig. 8, a typical workflow would be to use this visualization to investigate
the climate indices preceding this event.
Figure 11: Line plot of the electricity prices in Germany. The red dots correspond to low wind
power days. The correlation between wind capacity factor and electricity prices is particularly high
in countries that highly rely on wind, as is the case of Germany.
13