 
1 USING MACHINE LEARNING TO ANALYZE  
CLIMATE CHANGE TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER  
(CCTT)  
Shruti Kulkarni1 
1Department of Management  Studies , IISc, Bangalore , India. 
ABSTRACT  
The objective of the present paper is to review the climate change technology 
transfer. This research proposes a method for analysing CCTT using patent 
analysis and topic modelling . A collection of climate change mitigati on related 
technology (CCMT) patents from patent databases would be used as input to 
group patents in several relevant topics for climate change mitigation using the 
topic exploration model in this research. The research questions we want to 
address are: how have  the patenting activities changed over time in CCMT  
patents? And who are the technological leaders? The investigation of these 
questions can offer the technological landscape in climate change related 
technologies at the international level. We propose a hybrid Latent Dirichlet  
Allocation (LDA) approach for topic modelling and identification of relationships 
between terms and topics related to CCMT, enabling better visualizations of 
underlying intellectual property dynamics. Further, we propose predictive 
modelling for CCTT and competitor analysis to identify and rank countries with 
a similar patent landscape . The projected results are expected to facilitate the 
transfer process associated  with existing and emerging climate change 
technologies and improve technology cooperation between governments.  
1 INTRODUCTION  
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) defines te chnology transfer (TT) as "a 
broad set of processes covering the flows of know -how, experience, and equipment for mitigating 
and adapting to climate change among different stakeholders such as Governments, private sector 
entities, financial institutions, n ongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and research/educational 
institutions."(IPCC, 2000).  Schnepp et al. (1990) define technology transfer as ‘‘A process by which 
expertise or knowledge related to some aspect of technology is passed from one user to anothe r for 
the purpose of economic gain’’. In the case of the transfer of CCMT , the economic benefits  include  
the reduction of the future costs associated with climate change and othe r benefits to the co untries  
involved i n the transfer process.  Technology transfer is not only about the exchange of device or 
know -how across national or international frontiers , but also about the complicated processes of 
sharing knowledge and adapting technology to meet local scenarios.  
1.1. NEED FOR CCTT  
Agenda 21 that resulted from the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
recognizes that “there is a need for favourable access to and transfer of environmentally sound 
technologies, in particular to devel oping countries, through supportive measures that promote 
technology cooperation and that should enable transfer of necessary technological know -how as 
well as building up of economic, technical, and managerial capabilities for the efficient use and 
furthe r development of transferred technology” (United Nations, 1992). The Johannesburg Plan of 
Implementation (JPOI) that resulted from the World Summit on Sustainable Development calls 
upon governments and relevant regional and international organizations to t ake action on 
development, dissemination and deployment of affordable cleaner energy, energy efficiency and 
energy conservation technologies and the transfer of these technologies to developing countries 
(DSD, 2015). Figure 1 highlights Intellectual proper ty landscape in the field of climate change 
technologies. Drawing upon new extractions from the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database 
(PATSTAT), The International Energy Agency (IEA) and Organisation for Economic Co -operation  
2 and Development  (OECD) have f ound that while patenting of innovations in climate change 
mitigation technologies (CCMT) related to power generation, transport, buildings, manufacturing, 
and carbon capture and storage (CCS) had generally been increasing much faster than other 
technologi es in the period up to 2011 -2012 (IEA, 2019). However, there has been a notable drop -
off in the number of these patents since 2015 as represented by Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1 Global patent applications for climate change mitigation technologies Source: (IEA, 
2019)  
2 METHODOLOGY  
Studies indicate that most of the technology transfer that takes place is among developed countries 
(Stewart , 1992). The rate of global patenting on the climate chan ge mitigation technologies is 
essential for dissemination of knowledge globally.  For analysing  climate change  patents transfer 
data we propose a step by step methodology as represented in Figure 2.  
   
Figure 2 Proposed methodology  
2.1   STEP 1: DATA COLLECTION   
The patent documents related to climate change technologies will be collected from the United 
States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO)’s online database. The data source is appropriate for 
exploring technological trends because it is a representative patent database containing an enormous 
number of patents from all over the world and covers the most advanced technologies (Kim & Lee, 
2015). However, country wise  comparisons to the climate change technologies poses a further 
challenge ( Schmoch, 2008) . The proposed search query for the data collection consists of terms 
dealin g with climate change mitigation technologies, combined with climate change domain 
ontology and domain terms such as biodiversity, carbon, climate, ecology, environment, emission, 
ICT for climate change mitigation, energy storage , sustainable, etc.   
2.2   STEP 2:  DATA PREPROCESSING  
The collected patent documents represent an unstructured text format. Therefore,  in step 2 the data 
would be pre-processed  and transformed into a structured format for further analyses. The pre -
proces sing procedure will be performed using the document parsing techniques. The relevant items, 
such as the title, abstract, assignees, filing year, register year, classification code, and citation will 
be extracted from documents. For this purpose, the abstra ct in a free -text format will be required 
for further pre -processing tasks with natural language processing techniques, including 
tokenization, lemmatization, stop -word removing, and vector -space representation. Among these 
Step1 -Data collection from patent databases such as USPTO/WIPO
Step2 -Data preprocessing & Extraction of patent information
Step3 -Topic identification and exploration
Step4-Further analyses
-Predict potential CCTT
-Competitor analysis
-Identifying leaders and patent portfolios for countries 
3 text items, the abstract will be  used as the input to  lda2vec  to identify topics because it essentially 
includes the main problem addressed by the patented technology.   
2.3   STEP  3: TOPIC IDENTIFICATION AND EXPLORATION  
 The research question we will be addressing by this step is: what  is the topic landsca pe of patents 
filed for climate change mitigation technologies ? We propose topic identification and exploration 
using lda2ve c to a ddress the question. Topic modelling  is a statistical approach for discovering 
topics that occur in a document corpus (Ble i et al.,2003) . Lda2vec (Moo dy, 2016 ) combines the 
power of wo rd2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013 ) with the interpretability  of LDA . Based on the per -topic 
distribution, each patent document will be assigned to one of k topics exhibiting the highest 
probability. In this step we have the following objectives —  
(i) grouping patent  documents with similar topic probability distributions;   
(ii) increasing the understanding of the latent topic structure by producing a term distribution 
over each topic;  
(iii) label the k identified topics in the climate change mitigation - related patents.  
2.4  STEP 4: FURTHER ANALYSES    
In this last step, the identified topics are further explored from two aspects: trends in patenting 
activities over time and assignees in each topic. The research questions are as follows: how have 
the patenting activities changed over time? and who have been technolo gical leaders  in climate 
change related patents? The investigation of these questions can offer the technological landscape 
in climate change related technologies at the international level .  
After the investigation of patent lan dscape, we further propose  to build predictive models based on 
our patent analysis for technology transfer  among  countries. We would like to highlight few prior 
studies that used predictive modelling  based on patent information. Mogee, (1991) used patent 
families to ana lyze R&D planning, international patent activity, and patent indicators. Wu et al.  
(2010) constructed a predictive model based on international patent classification (IPC) codes to 
assess possibilities of patent registration. Kim et al. (2013) proposed a hierarchical analysis model 
of the decision -making  process in order to predict technology transfer policy directions. There are 
plenty of predictive algorithms that can be applied to our study. We propose a SNA based analysis 
for this step.  The predictive model can be constructed  by using SNA, regression analysis, decision 
trees, etc. There are various techniques to analyse  patent data. Among them we would use SNA, 
because SNA is an efficient approach to analyse  the patent data (Jun & Park, 2013).  The information 
based on IPC codes, citation information, and so on will be fetched to SNA graphs. Social network 
structures contain a number of nodes consisting of information for a particular targeted technology 
such as Number of forward citations, Novelty, Number of backward citations, Number of 
INPADOC Family patents, Patent duration (Expiration date – Registered date), Number of forward 
citations, Number of IPC codes extracted, and so on. The results from the SNA graphs will be u sed 
all together to explore meaningful relationships to build  predictive models  for predicting  factors  
that aid  technolog y transfer .  
To facilitate the process of technology transfer , we fu rther pro pose competitor an alysis  betwee n 
countries. It would be very useful for countries to know what the trend of a competitor’s technology 
development is . Based on the topic modeling results, we propose competitor analysis us ing 
techniques  such as w ord-based similarity (WBS)  and Topic -based divergence (TBD) . WBS 
represents countries by a vector of words, and it would rank the competitors based on (Cosine) 
similarity between countries.  TBD represents each country’s patent portfolio using the topic 
distribution and ranks the competitors by the KL -divergence.  
3 PROJECTED RESULTS  
In general, the transferred technologies are important nationally and internationally for improving 
their technological competitiveness. Using the methodology proposed in this study, we aim to give 
investors, governments and policy makers recommendations based on following projections:  
(i) Analysis of patent portfolios for disclosed regarding climate change related  topics using  
hybrid  LDA;   
4 (ii)  Find which countries are addressing the threat of climate change in their patent  portfolios;  
(iii) Aid developing countries for capacity building for climate change technology development 
and transfer;  
(iv) Aid policy makers in  creating new programmes such as the  Clean Development Mechanism 
(CDM), Asia Pacific  Partnership for positive advances in the case of international 
technology transfer;  
(v) Providing a predictive model of technology transfer by collecting patent data and applying 
text mining techniques for pre-processing .;  
In conclusion, we proposed a model that promotes developed countries to concretely pursue 
technology transfer with developing countries in the field of climate change related technologies.    
  
REFERENCES  
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I.  (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine 
Learning research , 3(Jan), 993 -1022.  
DSD. (2015).  DSD :: Areas of Work :: Energy - Intergovernmental Decisions. Available online : 
https://www.un.org/esa/dsd/dsd_aofw_ene/ene_integovedeci.shtml   
IEA. (2019). Global patent app lications for climate change mitigation technologies – a key measure 
of innovation are trending down Analysis - IEA. Available online :  
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/global -patent -applications -for-climate -change -mitigation -
technologies -akey-measure -of-innovation -are-trending-down .  
IPCC, ( 2000). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Special Report on Methodological 
and Technological Issues in Technology Transfer, edited by B. Metz, O. Davidson, J. -W. 
Martens, S. van Rooijen and L. Van Wei McGrory. Cambridge, UK and New York : Cambridge 
University Press (2000).   
Jun, S., & Park, S. S. (2013). Examining technological innovation of Apple using patent analysis. 
Industrial Management & Data Systems.  
Kim, H. M., Han, J. H., & Kim, Y. B. (2013). Study on future foresight of the technology 
commercialization policy. The Journal of Industrial Economics and Business , 26(2), 803 -824.  
Kim, J., & Lee, S. (2015). Patent databases for innovation studies: A comparative analysis of 
USPTO, EPO, JPO and KIPO. Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 92, 332 -345.  
Mogee, M. E. (1991). Using patent data for technology analysis and planning. Research -Technology 
Management , 34(4), 43 -49.  
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013).  Efficient Estimation of Word representations 
in Vector Space . ArXiv.Org. https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781  
Moody, C. (n.d.).  Mixing Dirichlet Topic Models and Word Embeddings to Make lda2vec . 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1605.02019.pdf  
Park, S., Lee, S. J., & Jun, S. (2015). A network analysis model for selecting sustainable technology. 
Sustainability , 7(10), 13126 -13141.  
Schmoch, U. (2008). Concept of A Technology Classification for Country Comparisons. Final 
Report to the World Intellectual  Property Organisation (WIPO). 2008.  Available  online:  
http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/ipstats/en/statistics/patents/pdf/wipo_ipc_technology.p
df    
5 Schnepp O, Bhambri A & Von G. (1990) . United States -China technology transfer.    Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall. ISBN: 013949975X.   
Sohn, S. Y., & Moon, T. H. (2003). Structural equation model for predicting technology 
commercialization success index (TCSI). Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 70(9), 
885-899.  
Stewart, F. (1992). Technology transfer for development. In North -South and South -South  (pp. 311 -
338). Palgrave Macmillan, London.  
United Nations, (1992). UN Division for Sustainable Development. Agenda 21: The Report of the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Chapter 34: Transfer of 
environmentally  sound technology, cooperation & capacity -building. Rio de Janeiro: Earth 
Summit, UN; 1992.   
Wu, C. H., Ken, Y., & Huang, T. (2010). Patent classification system using a new hybrid genetic 
algorithm support vector machine. Applied Soft Computing , 10(4), 1 164-1177.  
 
 
  
  
  