Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ACCELERATED DATA DISCOVERY
FOR SCALABLE CLIMATE ACTION
Henning Schwabe
Henning Schwabe@icloud.comSumeet Sandhu
CEO, Elementary IP LLC,
Santa Clara CA, USA
sumeet.k.sandhu@gmail.com
Sergy Yu. Grebenshchikov
sgreben@gwdg.de
ABSTRACT
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the planet
must decarbonize by 50% by 2030 in order to keep global warming below 1.5C.
This goal calls for a prompt and massive deployment of solutions in all societal
sectors - research, governance, ﬁnance, commerce, health care, consumption. One
challenge for experts and non-experts is access to the rapidly growing body of
relevant information, which is currently scattered across many weakly linked do-
mains of expertise. We propose a large-scale, semi-automatic, AI-based discovery
system to collect, tag, and semantically index this information. The ultimate goal
is a near real-time, partially curated data catalog of global climate information for
rapidly scalable climate action.
1 I NTRODUCTION
To keep warming below 1.5C, the planet must decarbonize by 50% by 2030, and by 100% by 2050,
with net negative emissions afterwards (IPCC, 2018). This leaves just one decade for concerted
climate action, which has to embrace multiple technical disciplines and multiple sectors of economy
and society.
Climate action differs from established climate modeling in the highly upscaled data demand. It
requires the integration of several heterogeneous tasks and datasets currently curated by separate
expert communities. With growing awareness, many individuals and organizations, ranging from IT
to agricultural communities, are looking for ways to contribute towards climate action. In the current
setting, every expert in a given sub-domain is a novice (a ‘non-expert’) in an adjacent sub-domain.
In order to scale climate action rapidly over the next few years, ‘non-experts’ need to be onboarded
efﬁciently, while the established communities are called upon to open up and remove their legacy
boundaries (D.E. Jensen et al, 2020a)
In this contribution, we propose to address the lack of data transparency and usability in the climate
change context using a large-scale data discovery system tailored to machine learning tasks. The
system is designed to be able to track, semantically index, and search the existing and emerging
climate-related data sources. The ultimate goal is a large-scale data catalog for rapid climate action
that is supported by task-speciﬁc interest groups and experts.
2 P ROBLEM STATEMENT
Many user groups seek climate and climate-derived data today: legislators and activists, ﬁnancial
institutions analysing risk and insurance, academics and researchers modeling climate and weather,
entrepreneurs and investors, professionals seeking jobs and service opportunities, consumers seek-
ing sustainable goods and services, and climate impacted communities seeking recovery and re-
silience. These cohorts of users maintain different lexica reﬂecting their needs and experience, and
usually have certain cohort-speciﬁc key variables and metrics such as Essential Variables in climate
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
science (WMO). To make search efﬁcient, these lexica and variables must be normalized across
cohorts.
A set of high-level climate-action tasks, which is directly or indirectly addressed by the above user
groups, includes:
A.Assessment of the current state of the environment – including land, ocean, atmosphere,
biosphere, hydrosphere - taken separately or combined and averaged over an appropriate
time window.
B.Model prediction of future changes of the environment , using a suitably selected time
horizon.
C.Quantiﬁcation of interactions and correlations between geophysical, industrial, ﬁnan-
cial, or political sub-systems.
D.Evaluation of the environmental impact of speciﬁc facilities, industrial practices, invest-
ment decisions, or international policies.
Global and dynamical monitoring of atmosphere and planetary surface is performed in a number
of international earth observation projects such as Copernicus (European Commission) and EOS-
DIS (NASA) and generate a continuous stream of high dimensional climate-related datasets. These
are complemented by a large number of data collections from ground-based observations (for ex-
ample at NOAA). Socioeconomic data is collected and distributed by a range of inter-governmental
institutions (e.g. OECD) but also by non-proﬁt organizations (e.g. Max Roser et al).
All tasks can be speciﬁed and aggregated at the regional, national, or planetary scale, thus adding
another dimension to the analysis. Illustrative examples of practical synthesized tasks, as well as the
integration of datasets, can be found in the volunteer work in (Catalyst Cooperative, 2020) focusing
on mitigating climate change and improving electric utility regulation in the United States.
Machine Learning (ML) has a proven track record in the analysis and inference on complex non-
linear multiscale systems, and is seen as an effective tool to address the climate change problem
(Rolnick & et al., 2019). We suggest that there is another application for ML techniques in the
ﬁeld: It can be the pivotal tool to mediate the accelerated access to the existing and emerging array
of heterogeneous datasets, which is a prerequisite for rapid development of efﬁcient analysis and
inference tools to enable climate action on a truly global scale.
3 S KETCH OF A TWO-STEPSOLUTION
In the ﬁrst step, a Search Engine for Climate-Action Data Discovery is proposed. It is expected to
ingest and index datasets that have been compiled, reviewed and released by expert communities or
working groups. The search engine features include full text search, semantic search on metadata,
and data discovery in numerical data related to above mentioned climate-action tasks.
The following extensions over the State of the Art are suggested:
Metadata taxonomy for climate action tasks is developed to concisely cover the require-
ments of the climate action tasks identiﬁed above. To this end, we propose to combine
metadata of several existing public repositories (e.g. WRI), existing taxonomies and on-
tologies related to environmental and sustainable development goals (L.J. McGibbney;
UNEP), new metadata derived from task deﬁnitions, and align the resulting metadata set
with knowledge domain-speciﬁc Essential Variables (Special Issue, 2020; WMO).
Partial imputation of missing metadata will take advantage of the restricted context of
climate-action tasks deﬁnitions (P. Cudr ´e-Mauroux et al, 2008).
Data discovery based on numerical signatures will enable discovery in numerical data
space (R.C. Fernandez et al, 2018)
Metadata curation is supported by the creation of a collaborative network of data owners, building
on existing efforts in the scientiﬁc community (D.E. Jensen et al, 2020b). Implementation and
hosting can be realized by utilizing the support and digital infrastructure of established web-scale
free-of-charge services or by setting up a new pro-bono service run by a non-proﬁt foundation.
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
UN supported multi-stakeholder processes aim to facilitate a global data infrastructure based around
data availability, quality and interoperability (D.E. Jensen et al, 2020b). In this context, a Search
Engine for Climate-Action Data Discovery can be seen as a contribution to rapid prototyping and
solving technical questions pertinent to ML tasks. In turn, successful ML prototypes can then be
shared widely to provide essential services to the broader ecosystem of socioeconomic approaches
and solutions in climate action.
In the second step, the search engine solution will be extended into a data catalog as a tool to
collaboratively sort and organize datasets to shorten time to value for data users. Self-organized
interest or expert groups dedicated to speciﬁc climate-action tasks are able to curate datasets that
have been identiﬁed and annotated as suitable for the selected tasks (M.-A. Sicilia et al, 2017).
Illustrative examples for a data catalog structure relevant for this proposal can be found at (CERN).
4 A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge the team at https://www.climatechange.ai and David
E. Jensen who brought attention to many of the issues cited here and provided important online
resources during preparation of this contribution.
REFERENCES
Catalyst Cooperative. , 2020. URL https://catalyst.coop/ .
CERN. ZENODO . URL https://zenodo.org .
D.E. Jensen et al. The promise and peril of a digital ecosystem for the planet.
Medium , 2020a. URL https://medium.com/@davidedjensen_99356/
building-a-digital-ecosystem-for-the-planet-557c41225dc2 .
D.E. Jensen et al. Annex 1: Priorities and processes in 2020 for a digital ecosystem for
the planet. Medium , 2020b. URL https://medium.com/@davidedjensen_99356/
annex-processes-and-priorities-in-2020-for-a-digital-ecosystem-884b09cb8cc7 .
European Commission. Copernicus: European Union’s Earth Observation Programme . URL
https://www.copernicus.eu/en .
IPCC. Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5C, 2018. URL https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/ .
L.J. McGibbney. Semantic Web for Earth and Environmental Terminology (SWEET) Ontologies .
URLhttps://github.com/ESIPFed/sweet/ .
M.-A. Sicilia et al. Community curation in open dataset repositories: Insights from zenodo. Procedia
Computer Science , 106, 2017.
Max Roser et al. Our World in Data . URL https://ourworldindata.org/ .
NASA. NASA’s Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS) . URL https:
//worldview.earthdata.nasa.gov/ .
NOAA. NOAA data access . URL https://www.nodc.noaa.gov/access .
OECD. OECD Data . URL https://data.oecd.org .
P. Cudr ´e-Mauroux et al. Picshark: mitigating metadata scarcity through large-scale p2p collabora-
tion. The VLDB Journal , 17, 2008.
R.C. Fernandez et al. Aurum: A data discovery system. IEEE 34th International Conference on
Data Engineering (ICDE) , 2018.
D. Rolnick and P. L. Donti et al. Tackling climate change with machine learning. arXiv , pp.
1906.05433, 2019.
Special Issue. The essential variables for sustainability. Int. J. Digital Earth , 13, 2020.
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
UNEP. Sustainable Development Goals Interface Ontology (SDGIO) . URL https://github.
com/SDG-InterfaceOntology/sdgio .
WMO. Essential Climate Variables . URL https://public.wmo.int/en/programmes/
global-climate-observing-system/essential-climate-variables .
WRI. Resourcewatch . URL https://resourcewatch.org .
4