Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
USING ML TO CLOSE THE VOCABULARY GAP IN THE
CONTEXT OF ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE IN
CHICHEWA
Amelia Taylor
Department of Computer Science
The Polytechnic, University of Malawi
Malawi
fataylor g@poly.ac.mw
ABSTRACT
In the west, alienation from nature and deteriorating opportunities to experience it,
have led educators to incorporate programs in schools, to bring pupils in contact
with nature and to enhance their understanding of issues related to the environ-
ment and its protection. In Africa, and in Malawi, where most people engage in
agriculture, and spend most of their time in the ’outdoors’, alienation from na-
ture is happening too, although in different ways. Large portion of the indigenous
vocabulary and knowledge remains unknown or is slowly disappearing. There is
a need to build a glossary of terms regarding environment and climate change in
the vernacular to improve the dialog regarding climate change and environmen-
tal protection. We believe that ML has a role to play in closing the ’vocabulary
gap’ of terms and concepts regarding the environment and climate change that
exists in Chichewa and other Malawian languages by helping to creating a visual
dictionary of key terms used to describe the environment and explain the issues in-
volved in climate change and their meaning. Chichewa is a descriptive language,
one English term may be translated using several words. Thus, the task is not to
detect just literal translations, but also translations by means of ‘descriptions’ and
illustrations and thus extract correspondence between terms and deﬁnitions and
to measure how appropriate a term is to convey the meaning intended. As part
of this project, the identiﬁcation of ‘loanword patterns’ into Chichewa from other
languages such as English, may be useful in understanding the transmission of
cultural items.
1 S OME RELEVANT LANGUAGE ISSUES IN MALAWI
Chichewa, with its geographical dialects , is the language of about half of Malawians, spoken both in
rural and urban places. Other notable languages are Chiyao and Tumbuka, Chilomwe and Chisena.
From 1907 to 1964, Malawi was a British protectorate and the education in the country was in the
hands of the Christian missionaries with small governmental input. Missionaries taught English, but
at the same time they engaged in learning the local language, conducting signiﬁcant linguistic work
(e.g., writing the ﬁrst dictionaries and grammatical rules) and engaging in the translation of the Bible
in the main local languages of Chichewa, Yao and Tumbuka. Over the years and more signiﬁcantly,
after Malawi became a Republic in 1964, the government assumed a more active role in education
by opening schools, and offering universal primary education. Malawi’s primary school education
shifted towards using Chichewa as the language of instruction. Chichewa was designated a national
language alongside English, the latter was used for ofﬁcial and business matters. In secondary
schools and higher education, English is used in teaching and learning. The language policy in
Malawi education has been an issue of debate, with some arguing that the use of the native vernacular
will improve children’s learning of new concepts, while others arguing that the need for ‘language
switching’ (mainly between English and Chichewa) in classrooms brings tensions and pressures
especially in the teaching of abstract and science subjects (Kaphesi (2003)). Others brought special
attention to a worrying ‘vocabulary gap’ that exists between Chichewa and other ofﬁcial indigenous
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
languages of Malawi (Chiuye & Moyo (2008)). The lack of adequate teaching and learning materials
in local languages creates ‘linguistically impoverished and deprived’ learners (Kamwendo (2016))
and there is a need to ‘develop terminologies and a broad lexical base’. This will help in ‘diffusing
and refuting stereotype notions that indigenous African languages lack a conceptual framework to
express scientiﬁc notions with appropriate scientiﬁc vocabulary’(Chiuye & Moyo (2008)). Studies
on the impact of language switching on the teaching of mathematics in schools in Malawi showed
that, although teachers had problems in translating and ﬁnding the terminology that best describes
some of the mathematical concepts, they did not receive systematic training in the use of language
(Kaphesi (2003)). Vernaculars and glossary of terms will help children understand concepts that
they would otherwise ﬁnd difﬁcult to understand if taught only in English (Kayambazinthu (1998)).
2 A GROWING VOCABULARY GAP FOR ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE
CHANGE
Malawi is a beautiful country with varied ecosystems (e.g., the well known Lake Malawi), grass-
lands areas and forests. These ecosystems have seen massive degradation over the years. Efforts
to restore the habitat, wild animals and protect the forests have been made by international organ-
isations working with the Malawi government (UNESCO (2017)). It is not the purpose of this
proposal to discuss all of these, but to emphasise that all these players recognise the need to increase
knowledge and awareness about climate change and make it available to school children and their
educators. Large sums of money have been spent by international supported campaigns in Malawi
through posters, community discussions and recently, videos , to encourage the planting of trees,
public and personal sanitation, and avoid littering and charcoal burning. A recent comprehensive
study on the charcoal market in Malawi, noted that there is a scarcity of accurate and good quality
information on the state of things in Malawi, and that contributes to the maintaining of the status
quo and a continuing degradation of the environmen (Kambewa et al. (2007)).
There seems to be a paradox between the fact that Africans are now seen to be environmentally
unfriendly and cannot be expected to make substantive contributions to the world’s environmen-
tal problem (Ikuenobe (2014)), and the African conception of the world, ubuntu, in which man is
seen to exist in harmony with nature and thus articulates a moral attitude towards the environment.
While these are complex issues, it is evident that communication in the local languages about these
issues plays an essential role. In a study on the causes of deforestation in Mwazisi (near Vwaza
Marsh Game Reserve), the low levels of awareness among the local population regarding forest use
and management was identiﬁed as one of the factors contributing to forestry cover reduction (Ng-
wira & Watanabe (2019)). ‘Traditional ecological knowledge that is, local people’s classiﬁcation,
knowledge, and use of the natural world, their ecological concepts, and their resource management
institutions and practices’ is at an especially high risk of disappearing if not adequately documented
(Mafﬁ (2001)).
In the west, alienation from nature and a growing incapacity to experience it, have led educators to
incorporate long term educational programs in schools, to bring pupils in contact with nature and to
enhance their understanding of issues related to the environment and its protection. Special focus
is given to pupils using ‘talk’ to organise, and express their ideas, opinions and feelings about their
environment imaginatively (The UK National Association for Environmental Education) . There is a
clear emphasis on learning, on using scientiﬁc language and the correct use of vocabulary in context
but also to explain meaning.
Alienation from nature is happening in Africa too, although in different ways. For example, some
have pointed out that a large portion of the indigenous vocabulary and knowledge remains unknown
or is slowly disappearing (Ikuenobe (2014) and Cloete (2011)). From a list of more than 20 cat-
egorisations of landscape types in the language Xitsonga, compiled by Wolmer very few are now
recognised by the younger generation (Duffy (2008)). The list demonstrates centuries of keen ob-
servation and experience of the local population, with terms ranging from words such as Kuthuma
denoting thicket (hiding places of hyenas, leopards and lions) to Patsa denoting open areas where
buffaloes graze, to Chawunga /mananga, denoting a remote, quiet and fearful area where only birds,
and wild animals are found. Each of these terms encapsulates a rich meaning about what it deﬁnes.
Many of these terms are now lost to urbanized Xitsonga speakers( Cloete (2011)).
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
There is a need therefore to bridge the vocabulary gap by creating glossaries that allow learners to
name the environment around them and thus recognise issues of climate change by ‘maintaining as
much control over meanings as possible’ because ‘by naming the world people name their realities
(Hall & Smith (2000)).
3 T HE ROLE OF MACHINE LEARNING
We believe that ML has a role to play in closing the ‘vocabulary gap’ of terms and concepts regard-
ing the environment and climate change that exists in Chichewa and other Malawian languages by
helping to creating a visual dictionary of key terms used to describe the environment and explain the
issues involved in climate change and their meaning. Chichewa is a descriptive language, one En-
glish term may be translated using several words. For example, “pollution”, without specifying what
kind of pollution it refers to, does not have a direct counterpart in Chichewa. “Air pollution” may
be translated as “kuwonongeka kwa mpwenya wa chilengedwe”, where ‘chilengedwe’ may mean
environment but usually is used to mean ‘creation’, and is also used to refer to “natural resources”,
“luso lachilengedwe’.
There are several practical steps in which ML can be used. We propose the task of building of a
glossary for the environmental science (similar to the one on wikipedia for English), in Chichewa
and other local languages used in Malawi using text available on the internet. Some of this text is
obtained by machine-generated translations but some is written by native speakers. The interesting
thing is not to detect just literal translations (where these are possible), but also translations by means
of ‘descriptions’ and illustrations and thus extract correspondence between terms used and perhaps
a measure of how appropriate a term is to convey the meaning intended. As part of this project, we
will identify ‘loanword patterns’, which may be useful in understanding the transmission of cultural
items. In many Bantu languages (such as Chichewa), lexical borrowings may be distinguished from
the inherited vocabulary on the basis of phonological irregularities.
The vocabulary thus created using ML, can be cleaned by a Chichewa linguist/ speaker. The follow-
ing examples of translations were done by Paul Kazembe, a senior teacher who teaches Chichewa as
a Secondary school subject. Paul’s translation can also inform the algorithms used to extract various
deﬁnitions. We are using in this proposal some of his translations. I have asked that he translated
a list of terms ﬁrst using no technical books or dictionaries, purely by using his own understanding
(Appendix A).
Words such as ‘arable land’ have an established meaning in Chichewa ‘malo olima’ - which literally
means ‘the land of the farmer’ or ‘agricultural land’. There is also possibly a borrowed term that is
used and Paul translated ‘arable land’ as ‘minda’.
Terms such as ‘acid rain’ are hard to translate. The Chichewa for rain is ‘mvula’. Hence a translation
by description is used. Notice that the word ‘acid’ is a loan word from English.
”MVULLA KAPENANSO MADZI OGWA KUCHOKERA MLENGALENGA OMWE
AMAKHALA NDI ASIDI.”
Similarly in translating ‘manure’ the loan word ‘manyowa’ may be used or the expression ‘zinyalala
zowolerana’.
Another good example is the word ‘aquaculture’ which was translated by Paul as ‘Ulimi wa za
mmadzi’ which literally means ‘farming on water’ and will need a contextual description in order to
be fully understood.
The term “adaptation (to environment)” was translated as “kuyanjana ndi nyango” which literraly
means “reconciliation with the climate” (the word kuyanjana means reconciliation) or ‘Kugwirizana
ndi malo’ where ‘malo’ literally means place and kugwirizana means agreement, relationship or
union.
The same for ‘carbon footprint’, which Paul translated loosely as ‘kuyeza’, but a deﬁnition by de-
scription is more appropriate:
”KUCHULUKA KWA MPWEYA WOIPA OMWE WATUMIZIDWA MLENGALENGA NA-
WONONGA CHILENGEDWE KWA NTHAWI YONSE WOMWE: MACHINIWO AKHALA
AKUGWIRITSIDWA NTCHITO. KAPENA CHIPANGIRENI CHINTHU CHINA CHAKE.”
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Words such as backﬂow, carbon neutral, cell, condensation, consumer, drainage, fossil fuel, ground-
water, habitat, landﬁll are hard to translate in Chichewa and need a translation by context or illustra-
tion, hence are harder to translate immediately even by language proﬁcient like Paul who has a rich
English and Chichewa vocabulary.
4 T HE PROPOSAL
What we propose is as follows:
(1) To start from a list of ‘seeds’ (see Appendix A), which are translation of environmental and
climate change terms by language experts such as Paul, and dictionary deﬁnitions from Chichewa-
English dictionaries. We use these seeds in searching over the internet for usage. Of interest would
be to detect which of the results retrieved are in fact machine translations.
(2) Using these seeds, to gather content from the internet in Chichewa on the topics of environment,
descriptions of nature and wildlife, climate change. Some text will be original writings in Chichewa,
some would be human translation of articles written in English or other languages (or based on these
articles), and some will be text generated using machine translators (for example Google translate).
ML techniques can be used to aid in detecting the type of document and de-coding the translation to
identify key terms (Dzmitry et al. (2014) and Baroni & Bernardini (2006)).
(3) To generate a glossary of environmental terms together with meaning, examples of usage, and
a measure of how appropriate a term is to convey the meaning intended e.g., based on ‘selective
concept extractions’ (Riloff (1993)).
(4) To analyze similarities between Chichewa texts and English text on climate change to detect loan
words and the presence of code-switching (Ehara & Tanaka-Ishii (2008)).
(5) From the searches which we get when searching with ‘seed terms’, we want to extract images
which appear inline text and, by using both the content surrounding them and actual picture captions,
to tag them and add them as a pictorial representation of the terms of the glossary (Devlin (2015)
and Bai & An (2018)).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Paul Kazembe for checking and helping with the Chichewa translations.
REFERENCES
Shuang Bai and Shan An. A survey on automatic image caption generation. Neurocomputing , 311:
291–304, 2018.
Marco Baroni and Silvia Bernardini. A new approach to the study of translationese: Machine-
learning the difference between original and translated text. Literary and Linguistic Computing ,
21(3), 2006. ISSN 02681145. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqi039.
Grace Chiuye and Themba Moyo. Mother-tongue education in primary schools in malawi: From
policy to implementation. South African Journal of African Languages , 28(2), 2008. ISSN
23051159. doi: 10.1080/02572117.2008.10587309.
Elsie L. Cloete. Going to the bush: Language, power and the conserved environment in South-
ern Africa. Environmental Education Research , 17(1), 2011. ISSN 14695871. doi: 10.1080/
13504621003625248.
Jacob et al Devlin. Exploring nearest neighbor approaches for image captioning. 2015.
Rosaleen Duffy. From Wilderness Vision to Farm Invasions: conservation and development in
Zimbabwe’s south-east lowveld by W. Wolmer Oxford: James Currey, 2007. Pp. 320. £17.95
(pb). The Journal of Modern African Studies , 46(4), 2008. ISSN 0022-278X. doi: 10.1017/
s0022278x08003601.
Bahdanau Dzmitry, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. In ICLR , 2014.
4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Yo Ehara and Kumiko Tanaka-Ishii. Multilingual Text Entry using Automatic Language Detec-
tion. Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(IJCNLP 2008) , 2008.
Thomas D. Hall and Linda Tuhiwai Smith. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous
Peoples. Contemporary Sociology , 29(3), 2000. ISSN 00943061. doi: 10.2307/2653993.
Polycarp A. Ikuenobe. Traditional African Environmental Ethics and Colonial Legacy. International
Journal of Philosophy and Theology (IJPT) , 2(4), 2014. ISSN 23335750. doi: 10.15640/ijpt.
v2n4a1.
Mataya Bennet Kambewa, Patrick and, Sichinga Killy, and Johnson Todd. Charcoal: the reality .
The International Institute for Environment and Development (UK), 2007. ISBN 978-1-84369-
678-0.
Gregory Hankoni Kamwendo. The new language of instruction policy in Malawi: A house standing
on a shaky foundation. International Review of Education , 62(2), 2016. ISSN 15730638. doi:
10.1007/s11159-016-9557-6.
Elias Kaphesi. The inﬂuence of language policy in education on mathematics classroom discourse
in malawi: The teachers’ perspective. Teacher Development , 7(2), 2003. ISSN 17475120. doi:
10.1080/13664530300200190.
Edrinnie Kayambazinthu. The language planning situation in Malawi. Journal of Multilingual and
Multicultural Development , 19(5), 1998. ISSN 01434632. doi: 10.1080/01434639808666363.
L. Mafﬁ. On biocultural diversity: Linking language, knowledge and the environment . Washington:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 2001.
Susan Ngwira and Teiji Watanabe. An Analysis of the Causes of Deforestation in Malawi: A Case
of Mwazisi. Land , 8(3), 2019. ISSN 2073-445X. doi: 10.3390/land8030048.
Ellen Riloff. Automatically constructing a dictionary for information extraction tasks. In Proceed-
ings of the National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 1993.
UNESCO. Climate Change Risk in Malawi: Country Risk Proﬁle . 2017.
A A PPENDIX
This section contains Chichewa translations for climate change related terms (Paul Kazembe). When
a translation is not known, there are empty columns.
English Term Chichewa Tterm
Acid Rain Mvula Mvula ya asidi.
Adaptation Kuyanjana ndi nyengo / Kugwirizana ndi malo
Afforestation Kudzala mitengo.
Agroforestry Ulimi wamasomphenya
Air pollution Kuwonongeka kwa mpweya
Carbon Footprint Kuyeza . . . ... Muyezo wa . . . ...
Carbon Neutral
Carbon Taxes
Carnivores Nyama
Catchment area Malo
Cell Tinthu ting’onoting’ono tamoyo timene timapanga thupi la chamoyo.
Climate Change kusintha kwa nyengo
Cloud Mtambo
Cold Air Pempho yozizira Kapmphepo kayaziyazi.
Commercial and Industrial Waste Kusamala zinyalala. Zotsalira
Compost Manyowa Zinthu zowolera mnthaka
Composting Kuwola Kusanduka manyowa
5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
English Term Chichewa Tterm
Condensation
Consumer Munthu Nyama Makampani
Consumption Kudya Kugwiritsa ntchito
Controlled Burning Kuwotcha zinyalala
Crop Rotation Ulimi wa kasinthasintha
Cyclone Mphepo
Decomposers (e.g., bacteria decomposing matter) Tizilombo ta matenda
Deforestation Kuwononga Chilengedwe
Desalinisation Kuchotsa mchele
Desert Chipalamba Malo a mchenga okhaokha
Dew Mame
Drainage Madzi osapindulitsa.
Drinking Water (potable water) Madzi akumwa Madzi opanda matenda
Drought Chilala
Dryland Salinity Mchere wa mnthaka
Ecology Maphunziro a pa zamoyo
Ecosystem Kukhalira pamodzi modalirana.
Endangered Species Chiwopsezo
Energy Mphamvu
Energy Efﬁciency Mphamvu
Environment Zomwe wayandikana nazo Zomwe zakuzungulira
Erosion Kukokoloka kwa nthaka
Evaporation Nthunzi Kuuluka kwa madzi.
Feedback Zotsatira
Fertilizers Fetereza Mchere wa mnthaka
fog Chifunga
Food Chain Kudalirana kwa za moyo
Food Security Kukhala ndi chakudya.
Forest Nkhalango Dondo
Fossil Fuel
Garden Organics Zinthu zomera mmakomo
Genome
Global Warming Kusintha kwa nyengo.
Governance Utsogoleri
Greenhouse effect
Greenhouse Gas Mpweya
Groundwater Madzi a nthaka
Growth Kukula
Habitat Malo
Heat Kutentha
Heavy Rain Mvula yambiri Mvula yosakata
Herbicide Mankhwala
Herbivores Nyama zodya thengo
High pressure area Malo osowa chakudya Malo otentha
Hydrosphere Madzi
Incineration Kuotcha zinyalala. Kuwotcha zinyansi.
Industrial Agriculture Makampani pa za ulimi
Inﬁltration Madzi akulowa pansi Kulowa pansi kwa madzi
Inorganic Matter
Intercropping Ulimi wa kasakaniza
Irrigation Ulimi wamthirira Ulimi wa chilimwe
Land Use Ubwino wa malo
Landﬁll Zinyalala zomwe zakwiliridwa
Landﬁll gas Mpweya woipa
Lightning
Low pressure area
6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
English Term Chichewa Tterm
Microorganism Kanthu kamoyo
Mist
Monoculture Ulimi
Mortality Rate Imfa
Natural Chilengedwe
Natural resources Zinthu zachilengedwe
Noise pollution Phokoso
Nutrients Chakudya
Pesticide Mankhwala
Plastic Pulasitiki
Pollution Kuwononga
Power Mphamvu
Precipitation Mvula
Precipitation
Producer
Product Chinthu
Productivity Phindu
Rain Mvula
Rainwater Madzi a mvula
Rainwater harvesting Kukolola madzi a mvula Madzi amkolola
Raw materials
Recycling Chibwereza
Reforestation Kubwezeretsa chilengedwe Kudzalanso mitengo.
Reuse Chibwereza Kugwiritsanso ntchito
Risk Vuto
Septic sewage Suweji
Sewage Suweji
Soil Dothi
Sun Dzuwa
System Chilinganizo
Topsoil Dothi lapamwamba
Tropical Cyclone Mphepo
Warm Air Mpweya wotentherako
Waste zinyalala
Waste Management Masamalidwe a zinyalala
Water Cycle Zokhudza madzi
Water Quality Madzi abwino
Water Table Madzi a pansi panthaka
Weather Nyengo
Wetlands Malo a chinyontho
Wind Energy Makina oyendera mphepo
Wind Turbine Mphepo
Work Ntchito
7