Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
MACHINE LEARNING APPROACHES TO SAFEGUARD -
ING CONTINUOUS WATER SUPPLY IN THE ARID AND
SEMI-ARID LANDS OF NORTHERN KENYA
Fred Otieno, Timothy Nyota, Isaac Waweru Wambugu, Celia Cintas, Samuel Maina,
William Ogallo & Aisha Walcott-Bryant
Future of Climate
IBM Research | Africa
Nairobi, Kenya
ABSTRACT
Arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) in developing countries are heavily affected
by the effects of global warming and climate change, leading to adverse climatic
conditions such as drought and ﬂooding. This proposal explores the problem of
fresh-water access in northern Kenya and measures being taken to safeguard water
access despite these harsh climatic changes. We present an integrated water man-
agement and decision-support platform, eMaji Manager, that we developed and
deployed in ﬁve ASAL counties in northern Kenya to manage waterpoint access
for people and livestock. We then propose innovative machine learning methods
for understanding waterpoint usage and repair patterns for sensor-instrumented
waterpoints (e.g., boreholes). We explore sub-sequence discriminatory models
and recurrent neural networks to predict waterpoint failures, improve repair re-
sponse times, and ultimately support continuous access to water.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Achieving sustainable access to fresh water for low- and middle-income countries with an ever-
expanding population requires multifaceted approaches, particularly in arid and semi-arid lands
(ASALs). Resilience to climate variability and change in ASALs is greatly dependent on sustainable
access to groundwater Taylor et al. (2013). Changes in climatic patterns are likely to increase the
spatio-temporal variability in precipitation rates and surface water that makes it difﬁcult to rely on
these sources of water. Mitigating solutions such as rainwater harvesting, while important, may not
be sustainable in ASALs which are often characterized by prolonged spells of drought followed by
rainstorm ﬂash ﬂoods that cause heavy loss of life and property Lin (1999).
Kenya has experienced a rise in the frequency of drought and ﬂoods in recent years. An analysis
done in the country by Glew et al. (2010) indicates that climate change will likely increase drought
incidences, temperatures, and water scarcity in northern Kenya which can exacerbate the poverty
levels in a region that depends on rangeland grazing of livestock for their livelihood. Consequently,
this region needs to adapt and manage its limited groundwater resources differently. However, to
date, policy- and decision-makers lack the necessary tools for improved evidence-based decision
support necessary for the planning and management of groundwater resources. Fortunately, recent
advancements in technologies such as remote sensors and IoT (Internet of Things) devices combined
with new deep learning methods can be leveraged to understand challenges and generate insights
pertaining to access and use of groundwater.
We present a novel water supply management and decision-support platform using a case study of
ﬁve counties in northern Kenya. We then propose two key areas for machine learning to provide
new insights into waterpoint management and decision-support: (1) the use of discriminatory sub-
sequence mining of waterpoint data to detect recurrent behaviours or unknown trends on deployed
waterpoint sensors, and (2) waterpoint failure prediction using long short-term memory (LSTM)
recurrent neural networks.
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 1: Sensors dashboard in eMaji Manager indicating sensor and site information.
2 EMAJIMANAGER PLATFORM :INVENTORY ,ISSUE REPORTING AND
REMOTE SENSING FOR WATERPOINTS
The eMaji Manager is an integrated mobile and web waterpoints management system that has been
implemented across 5 counties in northern Kenya through the KRAPID (Kenya Resilient Arid Lands
Project for Integrated Development Project) initiative mwa. One of the goals of KRAPID is to
improve water access in the 5 northern counties of Kenya from 37% to more than 50%. Before
the start of the project, county water ofﬁcials relied on a community leader to inform them about
an issue at a waterpoint such as a pump failure at a borehole. A team from the county would then
conduct a site visit to conﬁrm the issue and plan for repair. The repair work would then commence,
and once completed and the waterpoint is functional, the issue was closed. This process would
take weeks to months for a single waterpoint and could involve multiple waterpoints spread out in
different geographical locations. As a result, many communities were often left without continuous
access to water. To mitigate such technical water inaccessibility challenges, KRAPID aims at using
technology to signiﬁcantly reduce the time of reporting and repair of waterpoints.
The eMaji Manager ensures efﬁciency and transparency in the management and operation of water-
points. The platform has the following key capabilities: ticketing and issue tracking for monitoring
and repair of boreholes; descriptive analytics for reporting at the county and sub-county levels; and
visualization and analytics for decision support. For each waterpoint, the platform captures informa-
tion about the waterpoint name, geolocation, functional status, cost of water for livestock and people,
and infrastructural details. Additionally, we collect time-series data from sensor-instrumented bore-
holes such as operating hours, yield, and operational status. The data from the sensors is visualized
on a dashboard that is used by county government ofﬁcials for monitoring. Thus far, 114 boreholes
have been instrumented with sensors that have generated sensor data since 2018. Fig. 1 illustrates
how the dashboard is used to monitor sensor uptime, sensor status, and site uptime. "Sensor Uptime"
is the proportion of time that a given sensor is active and transmitting data: low, high and unknown.
"Sensor Status" refers to the proportions of sensors on water points within an administrative region
in any one of the following states: normal use, low use, no use, ofﬂine, repair, or seasonal disuse.
"Site Uptime" refers to the proportion of boreholes categorized by unknown, low, medium and high,
where uptime refers to the period of time that water is extracted. Fig. 1 also shows the geolocations
of all instrumented waterpoints and the "Sensor Status".
3 P ATTERN MINING AND FAILURE PREDICTION FOR WATERPOINTS
County and sub-county water stakeholders have to address several key questions to ensure there is
continuous access to water for their residents. One of their major concerns is the ability to forecast
potential areas where there may be water scarcity and to develop mitigation strategies to minimize
community disruption to water access. Such challenges can be addressed by understanding func-
tional patterns of instrumented waterpoints, detecting anomalies in their operation, and predicting
failures. We propose to study "waterpoint behavior" using two different techniques. First, we pro-
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
pose an unsupervised method to analyze sequential patterns from waterpoint sensor data that lead to
failures, detect recurring behaviours, and automatically generate rules and unknown trends associ-
ated with a waterpoint. Second, we propose to train time-series models that predict events such as
failure, or high yield, that will trigger targeted interventions to the communities potentially affected.
We can ﬁnd several examples in literature that use sequence mining techniques and recurrent net-
works to predict failure on sensor data and industrial processes. For example, Hajiaghayi & Vahedi
(2019) present a solution based on recurrent neural networks to ﬁnd sessions that are prone to code
failure in applications that rely on telemetry data for system health monitoring. In the manufacturing
space, Lim et al. (2017) propose a method to construct a predictive model of failure based on event
sequences observed at the wire bonding process step. Kuzin & Borovicka (2016) shows different
approaches that deal with early failure detection of sensor parts.
Given the sequential nature of waterpoint sensor data, we use Discriminatory Subsequence Mining
to compare two subgroups of instrumented waterpoints (boreholes) and mine patterns that appear
predominantly in one of the subgroups. For example, the set of waterpoint sensor data that contains
a failure, compared to the rest of the waterpoints. Sequence mining provides the domain expert with
a series of common sequential patterns of waterpoints and associated metrics including coverage -
what percentage of one group contains a speciﬁc pattern, and lift- how likely a pattern is to appear
in one group and not in the other one. For example, we can ﬁnd a discriminatory sequence flow!
normal!normal!normalg, which refers to one month of low use followed by three months
of normal use, with coverage left = 0:3388 ,coverage right = 0:0892 , and lift = 3:795. The
coverage leftvalue means that 33% of the sensors that contain this sequence end with failure status.
Thecoverage right value refers to a low frequency in the rest of the population data, thus, the pattern
found is discriminatory regarding failure class in sensors. Furthermore, the lift value shows that this
pattern is 3 times more likely to appear on sensors with failure events than functional waterpoint
sensors. This insight would be valuable for developing automated waterpoint repair regime.
For failure prediction, our strategy is to map the input sequence of events from sensor_status to a
ﬁxed-sized vector representation using a recurrent neural network (RNN), and then feed the vector
to a softmax layer for classiﬁcation on the type of failure status: {ofﬂine, repair, seasonal disuse}.
Given a series of status events e=fe0; e1; e2;; eTgwe ﬁrst use a lookup layer to get the repre-
sentation vector for each status event eifor examples of status types. The output at the last moment
hTcan be regarded as the representation of the full sequence of status events during the last ndays
prior to the failure. This has a fully connected layer followed by a softmax non-linear layer that pre-
dicts the probability of a particular type of failure for that time window of events. We can process, in
real-time, new sensor data and use the trained model to infer what is the probability, P(si)x=fail
for an online sensor, si, installed at a waterpoint, to fail in the next xdays. When the probability
exceeds a given threshold we can update the dashboard on eMaji Manager and automatically add
the waterpoint to a "repair watchlist". In the big picture, this would contribute to the water supply
crisis alarm that has a spectrum of (low - medium - intense) water crisis based on the projection of
impacted waterpoints in a region. Example properties that would factor into triggering the alarm are
waterpoint relevance for drought emergencies and the population served.
4 D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Climate change and variability has had a direct impact on livelihoods in northern Kenya due to
the increased uncertainty of drought seasons. This has necessitated the development of adaptation
strategies to help cope with acute water shortages. We developed the eMaji Manager as a tool to
assist in adapting to drought emergencies. eMaji Manager is an integrated waterpoint inventory,
issues tracking, and decision support system for county ofﬁcials. We propose to enhance the quality
of data in eMaji by exploiting the waterpoint and sensor data to extract temporal patterns and predict
non-functionality to shorten repair response time and provide an emergency alert system.
Further work needs to be done on cross-domain data linkage to integrate insights from other data
sources such as weather, human migration patterns, and aquifers. Recent work in weather modeling,
for instance in forecasting extreme events Rolnick et al. (2019), shows great promise for identifying
weather patterns and predicting precipitation with a forecast horizon of between four to six weeks
Hwang et al. (2019). We seek to augment weather, waterpoint and sensor data to enhance the
understanding of temporal and spatial patterns on water availability for ASAL regions.
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
REFERENCES
Kenya rapid program. URL https://mwawater.org/programs/
kenya-program-background/ .
Glew, Louise, Hudson, Malcolm D., Osborne, and Patrick E. Evaluating the effec-
tiveness of community-based conservation in northern Kenya: A report to The Na-
ture Conservancy . Centre for Environmental Sciences, University of Southampton,
https://rmportal.net/groups/cbnrm/cbnrm-literature-for-review-discussion/evaluating-the-
effectiveness-of-community-based-conservation-in-northern-kenya-a-report-to-the-nature-
conservancy, 2010.
Mahdi Hajiaghayi and Ehsan Vahedi. Code failure prediction and pattern extraction using lstm
networks. In 2019 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Big Data Computing Service and
Applications (BigDataService) , pp. 55–62. IEEE, 2019.
Jessica Hwang, Paulo Orenstein, Judah Cohen, Karl Pfeiffer, and Lester Mackey. Improving sub-
seasonal forecasting in the western u.s. with machine learning. In Proceedings of the 25th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery Data Mining , KDD â ˘A´Z19,
pp. 2325â ˘A¸ S2335, New York, NY , USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
9781450362016. doi: 10.1145/3292500.3330674. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3292500.3330674 .
Tomás Kuzin and Tomás Borovicka. Early failure detection for predictive maintenance of sensor
parts. In ITAT , pp. 123–130, 2016.
Hwa Kyung Lim, Yongdai Kim, and Min-Kyoon Kim. Failure prediction using sequential pattern
mining in the wire bonding process. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing , 30(3):
285–292, 2017.
Xiao Lin. Flash ﬂoods in arid and semi-arid zones. Technical documents in hydrology , 1999.
David Rolnick, Priya L Donti, Lynn H Kaack, Kelly Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste, Kris Sankaran,
Andrew Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic-Dupont, Natasha Jaques, Anna Waldman-Brown, et al.
Tackling climate change with machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05433 , 2019.
Richard G Taylor, Bridget Scanlon, Petra Döll, Matt Rodell, Rens Van Beek, Yoshihide Wada,
Laurent Longuevergne, Marc Leblanc, James S Famiglietti, Mike Edmunds, et al. Ground water
and climate change. Nature climate change , 3(4):322–329, 2013.
4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 2: Overview dashboard for county ofﬁcial. The dashboard displays summary data about
waterpoint types in the region, operational states summary of waterpoints and individual waterpoints
on a map
A A PPENDIX
A.1 W ATERPOINT INVENTORY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Fig. 2 shows the overview page for waterpoint inventory management. This page helps the county
ofﬁcers to manage waterpoints in their regions. In addition to viewing a summary of waterpoint
statuses, waterpoint types and locations of waterpoints on a map, the ofﬁcers are able to view, edit
and add waterpoint information including, infrastructure information on the waterpoints, sensor in-
formation, costs associated with the waterpoints, usages and even reports for a particular waterpoint
as shown in Fig. 3
A.2 D ECISION SUPPORT PLATFORM
Fig. 4 shows the overview page for the decision support functionality. An ofﬁcer is given a snapshot
of the status of waterpoints in their region. At a glance, they are able to know how many tickets are
open, how many waterpoints are impacted, and the number of animals and people affected by the
non-functional waterpoints. They also see which tickets are open and are able to act on them, or
assign relevant ofﬁcials to follow up on open tickets, thus ensuring responsive repairs. The ofﬁcer
can also drill down to see details of the particular non functional borehole. The system also generates
recommendations for the ofﬁcers on mitigation actions that they can take, as illustrated in Fig. 5
based on severity of reported issue.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge SweetSENSE Inc who instrumented waterpoints and made the sensor
data available as a part of the Kenya RAPID project. We also would like to acknowledge Millennium
Water Alliance and partners for their continued support on the Kenya RAPID project.
5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 3: Dashboard showing all details of a particular waterpoint. The details include infrastructure
information, usage, sensor, operational status and reports for the waterpoint
Figure 4: Decision support dashboard for county ofﬁcial. The dashboard displays summary data
about waterpoints in the region, non-functional waterpoints, the tickets and issues requiring action,
and a summary of reported issues.
6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 5: Decision support drill-down page for county ofﬁcial. The page displays waterpoint details
of the non functional waterpoint, present and past ticket details to allow for tracking of the issues
and their resolution, and a recommended mitigation actions based on severity of issue and context
of waterpoint
Figure 6: Dashboard showing sensor information: yield, location sensor status and a graph display-
ing daily sensor readings
7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 7: Table showing daily data received from remote sensors including sensor id, sensor classi-
ﬁcation, status, up-time, yield and active hours.
8