Bee Activity Prediction and Pattern
Recognition in Environmental Data
Christine Preisach∗1and Marius Herrmann2
1University of Applied Sciences Karlsruhe, Germany
2Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
Abstract
As a consequence of climate change, biodiversity is declining rapidly.
Many species like insects, especially bees, suffer from changes in temper-
ature and rainfall patterns. Applying machine learning for monitoring
and predicting specie’s health and life conditions can help understanding
and improving biodiversity. In this work we use data collected from cam-
eras and sensors mounted upon beehives together with different other data
sources like weather data, information extracted from satellite images and
geographical information. We aim at predicting bees’ health (measured
as their activity) and analyzing influencing environmental conditions. We
show that we are able to accurately predict bees’ activity and understand
their life conditions by using machine learning algorithms and explainable
AI. Understanding these conditions can help to make recommendations on
good locations for beehives. This work illustrates the potential of apply-
ing machine learning on sensor, satellite and weather data for monitoring
and predicting species’ health and hence shows the ability for adaptation
to climate change and a more accurate species monitoring.
1 Introduction
The environmental changes driven by climate change are disturbing natural
habitats and species in ways that are still only becoming clear. There are
strong signs that rising temperatures, changing rainfall pattern, droughts and
extreme weather events are affecting biodiversity [14, 8]. For insects we know
that, their number is reduced by two-thirds [15]. The threat posed by climate
change to biodiversity is expected to increase, yet thriving ecosystems also have
the capacity to help reduce the impacts of climate change [10]. Bees are part of
biodiversity, the western honey bee is the most widespread managed pollinator
globally, with that it contributes directly to food security, a third of the world’s
food production depends on bees, they are essential to people and the planet
[4]. Bees’ health is very much correlated to their environmental conditions. The
∗christine.preisach@h-ka.de
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICLR 2024pollen collection activity of bees is directly related to bees’ health, since pollen
is the only food bees eat. Environmental parameters like temperature, humidity
or wind determine the pollen collection activity directly or indirectly, i.e., they
either have an impact on the bees’ health itself or on its food sources such as
plants or rivers [5, 7]. It is therefore important to consider interactions within
an ecosystem when analyzing bees’ health and pollen collection activity.
2 Proposal
We propose to analyse environmental factors and verify their influence on bee
activity. We are interested in knowing which weather- and time-related condi-
tions, as well as which land cover classes have an impact on bee activity. Mea-
suring pollen activity and health on one side aids monitoring the environmental
conditions [6], i.e., bees’ health can help monitoring and predicting the environ-
mental conditions and on the other side helps comprehending which conditions
are important for the health of a species. This can aid to make recommenda-
tions on good locations for beehives and hence improve the protection of species.
Our major aim in this work is to predict bee activity and by doing so analysing
the influencing environmental factors. Therefore we applied supervised machine
learning methods. Since the prediction target is a numeric variable - bee activ-
ity, we used regression algorithms. We conducted many experiments in order to
analyse the aforementioned objectives, details are explained in the appendix.
3 Results and Discussion
In our experiments we used a 70%/30% split for training and testing our mod-
els. We evaluated the prediction quality and analysed the influence of input
features on bee activity (see figure 1). For assessing the predictive power of
our models, we calculated mean absolute error (MAE) and mean squared error
(MSE). Figure 1a depicts MAE andMSE of the learned models applied to test
data. The lowest MAE and MSE values were achieved by ANN ,RF,DT,SVM .
Hence, the relation between input features and bee activity seems not to be
linear. Linear models ( GLM ,LL,LM) didn’t perform well.
We are interested in understanding which weather- and time-related condi-
tions show a positive or negative effect on bee activity, therefore we analyzed
the importance of features on bee activity. Since not all algorithms used, are
explainable and some of the explainable ones are less accurate, we decided to
analyze the effect of input features on bee activity with shapley values. However,
when comparing the absolute shapely values, they differ from model to model.
Therefore it is not possible to decide on the size of an effect over all models. For
this reason, we calculated the relative importance (influence) of a feature in a
model by dividing the absolute mean shapley value of a feature by the sum of
all absolute shapley values of a model. This enables the comparison of feature
importance among different models. Figure 1b illustrates the mean and median
2(a) Prediction quality
 (b) Relative feature importance
Figure 1: Evaluation results
relative importance of features over all models. Only the features with a mean
relative importance of more than 2.5% are labeled which their names. The most
influential features are related to soil water index (SWI) , humidity in the air,
soil temperature ,day length ,part of the day and the beehive itself. The beehive
is an important input feature in our models, it seems that each bee colony is
somewhat different in terms of its collection activity. We inspected the absolute
shapley values in order to extract the direction of the effects, i.e., whether a fea-
ture has a positive or negative influence on bee activity. It is known that bees
do not collect food before and during rainfall [7, 3], this is probably the reason
for the negative effect of relative air humidity and the soil humidity (SWI at 5
cm depth) and soil temperature at 10 cm. While it rains the soil humidity in
5 cm depth increases and the soil temperature decreases. For lower soil layers
(depth of 40 cm) we see a positive effect of SWI on bee activity, this might
be because the water has seeped away after rainfall and helps plants to stay
healthy [1]. Part of day has a negative effect too, since bees do only collect
pollen during daytime. Day length has a positive impact, since bees have more
time to collect pollen if there are more hours with day light. In addition to the
most influential features shown in figure 1b, we found out that strong winds
lead to less activity because of the additional effort bees have to put in flying
and collecting pollen, this corresponds to the findings in [16, 7]. Air pressure
andsunshine hours have a positive effect, high air pressure and many hours of
sunshine indicate low rainfall and leads to more collection activity. Moreover,
we saw that higher methane concentration has a negative effect, since higher
methane concentrations are related to higher air temperatures (due to back re-
flection as well as absorption of sunlight and heat radiation) and therefore more
cooling efforts in the beehive are needed by the bees, which means that bees
are less active. It is surprising that some environmental factors like air tem-
perature and precipitation play a smaller role in our models, which contradicts
the findings in the literature. Our assumption is, that this is caused by multi-
collinearity in the data, we see highly correlated input features (see figure 3 in
the appendix), this is natural since there are many interactions between various
environmental parameters. Furthermore, we are interested to know which effect
3land cover classes like pastures, urban areas and others have on bee activity. In
order analyze these effects, we had to conduct an additional experiment where
we only used the land cover classes in a linear regression model. Reason for this
is, that land cover class values (portion of each land cover class value and area)
of a specific beehive do not vary over time, i.e., there is not much variance in the
data, therefore machine learning models do not regard these features as impor-
tant compared to others. We analyzed the coefficients of the linear regression
model and the shapley values (see figure 4 in the appendix). We found signifi-
cant positive effects of mixed andbroad-leaf forest , as well as of orchards , weaker
were the effects of pastures ,discontinued urban areas andwater bodies . We have
observed strong negative effects for water courses ,shrubs ,urban green . When
comparing the average activity of our ten beehives, we found least activity in
locations with a large proportion of urban areas. During our project we faced
two main challenges: One related to multicollinearity (highly correlated input
features) which hampers the interpretation of the results. We addressed this
issue by applying algorithms that are less sensitive to the problem (like RF and
ANN) or use regularization. Moreover, we performed feature selection which re-
moved some of the highly correlated features. The second challenge was around
the availability of bee activity data, as mentioned in the data section, we had
only observations for August and September, that means that data from spring
and early summer was not available and hence we cannot draw conclusions for
those seasons.
4 Conclusion
We showed that nonlinear machine learning algorithms are able to accurately
predict bee activity and although most well performing algorithms are not ex-
plainable, we were still able to extract the impact of environmental conditions
on be health (activity). We computed shapley values and the relative features
importance. We found several environmental conditions that are important for
bees’ health. Monitoring bee activity and understanding these conditions can
help to make recommendations on good locations for beehives. We found strong
effects (negative and positive) of environmental conditions (weather-, time- and
land cover class related features) on bee activity (especially variables around soil
water index at different depths were important and not yet analysed), hence we
conclude that it is important where beehives are being located in order to adapt
to climate change and to keep them healthy. In future work we plan to conduct
further experiments on additional data that includes recordings from spring and
early summer, in order to make our findings more robust and generalisable.
References
[1] A. Amin, G. Zuecco, J. Geris, L. Schwendenmann, J. McDonnell, M. Borga,
and D. Penna. Depth distribution of soil water sourced by plants at the
4global scale: A new direct inference approach. Ecohydrology , 13:e2177, 03
2020.
[2] J. Cavanaugh and A. Neath. The akaike information criterion: Background,
derivation, properties, application, interpretation, and refinements. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics , 11, 03 2019.
[3] D. Clarke and D. Robert. Predictive modelling of honey bee foraging ac-
tivity using local weather conditions. Apidologie , 49, 02 2018.
[4] IPBES. Global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of
the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosys-
tem Services, Apr. 2022.
[5] K. Jiang, Z. Pan, F. Pan, J. Wang, G. Han, Y. Song, Z. Zhang, N. Huang,
S. Ma, and X. Chen. Influence patterns of soil moisture change on surface-
air temperature difference under different climatic background. Science of
The Total Environment , 822:153607, 2022.
[6] S. Khalifa, E. Elshafiey, A. Shetaia, A. Ali, A. Algethami, S. Mushar-
raf, M. Alajmi, C. Zhao, S. Masry, M. Abdel Daim, M. Halabi, G. Kai,
Y. Al Naggar, M. Bishr, M. Diab, H. El-Seedi, and M. Pascaul. Overview
of bee pollination and its economic value for crop production. Insects ,
12:688, 07 2021.
[7] O. Komasilova, V. Komasilovs, A. Kviesis, and A. Zacepins. Modeling of
the potential honey bee colony foraging activity based on the agrometeo-
rological factors. Baltic Journal of Modern Computing , 9, 01 2021.
[8] T. Lovejoy, L. Hannah, and E. Wilson. Biodiversity and Climate Change:
Transforming the Biosphere . Yale University Press, 2019.
[9] Q. A. Mendoza, L. Pordesimo, M. Neilsen, P. Armstrong, J. Campbell, and
P. T. Mendoza. Application of machine learning for insect monitoring in
grain facilities. AI, 4:348–360, 03 2023.
[10] T. Newbold. Future effects of climate and land-use change on terrestrial
vertebrate community diversity under different scenarios. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 285:20180792, 06 2018.
[11] R. Rodr´ ıguez-P´ erez and J. Bajorath. Interpretation of machine learning
models using shapley values: application to compound potency and multi-
target activity predictions. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design ,
34, 10 2020.
[12] L. S. Shapley. A value for n-person games. In H. W. Kuhn and A. W.
Tucker, editors, Contributions to the Theory of Games II , pages 307–317.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1953.
5[13] M. Tschaikner, D. Brandt, H. Schmidt, F. Biessmann, T. Chiaburu,
I. Schrimpf, T. Schrimpf, A. Stadel, F. Haußer, and I. Beckers. Multi-
sensor data fusion for automatized insect monitoring (kinsecta). page 1, 10
2023.
[14] M. C. Urban, G. Bocedi, A. P. Hendry, J.-B. Mihoub, G. Pe’er, A. Singer,
J. R. Bridle, L. G. Crozier, L. D. Meester, W. Godsoe, A. Gonzalez, J. J.
Hellmann, R. D. Holt, A. Huth, K. Johst, C. B. Krug, P. W. Leadley,
S. C. F. Palmer, J. H. Pantel, A. Schmitz, P. A. Zollner, and J. M. J.
Travis. Improving the forecast for biodiversity under climate change. Sci-
ence, 353(6304):aad8466, 2016.
[15] R. Warren, J. Price, E. Graham, N. Forstenh¨ ausler, and J. Vanderwal.
The projected effect on insects, vertebrates, and plants of limiting global
warming to 1.5 °c rather than 2 °c.Science , 360:791–795, 05 2018.
[16] H. Zhao, G. Li, D. Guo, H. Li, Q. Liu, B. Xu, and X. Guo. Response
mechanisms to heat stress in bees. Apidologie , 52(2):388–399, Apr. 2021.
A Data
In general monitoring species and quantifying health of a specific species is still
difficult. Nowadays different camera systems for insect detection have been
developed [9, 13]. To determine bees’ health we are extracting the pollen col-
lection activity (activity for short) of bees from videos captured with intelligent
camera- and sensor-technology. The number of bees flying into the beehive and
the amount of pollen collected by an individual bee is recognized using AI. The
activity of a beehive at a specific point in time (every five minutes during the
day) is calculated as the ratio of pollen input (amount of collected pollen) and
the number of bees flying into the beehive. In this study we are using data
collected during August and September 2021 from ten beehives in five different
locations in Germany. Additionally, different other data sources are considered
in our study, like:
•Weather data1including information on dew point, humidity, precipita-
tion, air pressure, ground temperature, sunshine duration, air temperature
and wind).
•Data on greenhouse gases at different altitudes ( CO,CO 2,N2O,CH 4)2.
•Information on land cover classes (CLC)3, they represent spatial informa-
tion on different types (classes) of physical coverage of the Earth’s surface,
e.g. forests, grasslands, croplands, lakes, wetlands (we considered those
land cover classed which are 3 kms around the beehives).
1https://www.dwd.de/
2https://www.icos-cp.eu/
3https://land.copernicus.eu/content/corine-land-cover-nomenclature-guidelines/html/
6•Information on soil properties like soil temperature and humidity. We
used the soil water index (SWI) which is determined by soil temperature
and precipitation (at eight different depths - from 2 to 100 cm depth, near
the beehives). SWI is extracted from satellite data (from the Copernicus
project4).
Figure 2 shows the five locations (each beehive is depicted as a black dot)
and the surrounding area in terms of the land cover classes, we see that some
locations are mainly surrounded by grasslands and broad-leaf forest and others
are located in urban areas or are placed near a water body. We computed the
area and the proportion of each land cover class surrounding the beehive. We
included time related information by extracting features like day length and part
of day (we divided the day into eight 3-hours segments). In order to integrate
all data sources, we had to aggregate the data from the original granularity of
five minutes to three hours (we computed the minimum, maximum and mean
of each numeric input variable). After combining all data sources, we had 130
input features and around 5,000 observations (an observation is identified by
the beehive, part of the day and date).
Figure 2: Land cover classes around the beehives
B Exploratory Analysis and Methods
We performed a correlation analysis (using Pearson-Bravais correlation) on dif-
ferent feature groups and activity, e.g., we computed the correlation of weather
features and activity. Figure 3 shows several weather features that are highly
correlated to the target variable but also to themselves. Other features e.g.,
the SWI features show high correlation to bee activity too. We applied filter-
4Copernicus Project https://www.copernicus.eu/
7Figure 3: Correlation of weather features and activity
based feature selection using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) [2] and
used the resulting 55 features for learning. Since we aimed at understanding
the impact of the environment onto bee activity, we first learned several ex-
plainable regression models like linear regression (LR), generalized linear model
(GLM), lasso lars, i.e., a lasso model with least angle regression (LL), decision
trees (DT) and random forest (RF). We analyzed the coefficients of the linear
models (LR, GLM, LL) as well as the rules learned by the decision tree algo-
rithms and the feature importance of the random forest model. But we assumed
Figure 4: Absolute shapley vaues of land cover classes
that some other so called black box algorithms, which are not easily usable for
explaining the impact of features on predictions, might perform better in terms
of prediction accuracy, hence we used algorithms like support vector machines
for regression (SVM) and artificial neural networks (ANN). Since these models
are not interpretable [11] and different model types are hardly comparable in
terms of their explainable effects, we additionally computed so called shapley
8values [12]. Shapley values, a method from coalitional game theory, they help
to explain a prediction by assuming that each feature value of an instance is
a “player” in a game where the prediction is the payout. Or in other words,
a shapley value corresponds to the mean marginal contribution of each feature
value across all possible values in the feature space i.e., they describe how much
features contribute to the prediction. Features with positive shapely values, pos-
itively impact the prediction, while those with negative values have a negative
impact. The magnitude is a measure of how strong the effect is.
9