Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN TROPICAL CYCLONE
FORECASTING
Nusrat Sharmin∗
Department of Computer Science
Military Institute of Science and Technology
Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, 1216, Bangladesh
nusrat@cse.mist.ac.bdMd. Mahbubur Rahman
Department of Computer Science
Military Institute of Science and Technology
Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, 1216, Bangladesh
mahbub@cse.mist.ac.bd
Md Mokhlesur Rahman
Military Institute of Science and Technology
Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, 1216, Bangladesh
mokhles@cse.mist.ac.bd
Sabbir Rahman
Military Institute of Science and Technology
Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, 1216, Bangladesh
sabbir.2317@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Cyclones, one of the most devastating weather phenomena, pose a significant
threat to human life and infrastructure, especially in coastal areas. Accurate pre-
diction of cyclone formation and evolution is crucial for disaster risk reduction
and response activities. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for cyclone
prediction using graph neural networks (GNNs). The GNNs model wind flow
patterns as edges between nodes, where each node represents a geographic loca-
tion. The strength and direction of the wind flow between nodes are represented
by the weight of the edges. We train the GNNs on historical data to understand
the relationships between wind flow patterns and cyclone formation and develop-
ment. The GNNs can then analyze the current state of the graph and forecast the
formation, track, and intensity of future cyclones. Our proposed method offers a
significant improvement over traditional models, which often fail to capture the
intricate relationships between different atmospheric and oceanic areas. By utiliz-
ing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), we can model wind flow patterns as edges
between nodes in a graph, thereby gaining a more comprehensive understanding
of the entire atmospheric and oceanic system. Our approach is highly adaptable
and can incorporate data from a wide range of sources, including satellites, re-
mote sensing devices, and ground-based observations. Additionally, GNNs are
versatile and flexible, allowing us to make modifications and updates as new data
becomes available. While GNNs offer promising results for cyclone prediction,
they are complex models that require relevant expertise to develop and train. Our
proposed method presents a new and innovative approach to cyclone prediction
that has the potential to significantly improve disaster risk reduction and response
activities. Overall, we believe that our GNN-based method is a promising ap-
proach to better predicting the formation and evolution of cyclones, and has the
potential to greatly improve disaster response and risk reduction efforts.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Hurricane, typhoon, or cyclone which is collectively known as Tropical Cyclone (TC) is one of
the most common natural disasters around the world. Particularly the countries located in tropical
∗
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
and subtropical regions face TCs during pre-monsoon (March-May) and post-monsoon (October-
December) seasons every year. Poorly built houses, lack of appropriate early warning systems, etc.
make developing and underdeveloped countries much more vulnerable to TC than the developed
world. This is the greatest disaster that affects the people living in these countries almost every
year. Coastal flooding caused by cyclones causes severe damage to lives and property. Inundation
followed by storm surges, destruction of communication systems, breakage of supply chains, etc.
hinders cultivation and subsequently makes people starve and in many instances causes famine. The
lack of appropriate advanced early warning systems is one of the main reasons that intensifies the
disaster caused by TC. In Particular, the lead time for cyclone forecasts is very limited in developing
countries for which different agencies and the people in the affected area fail to take necessary prepa-
rations for upcoming storms. As an example, the lead time for TC forecasts used by the Bangladesh
Meteorological Department (BMD), the main government agency responsible for issuing forecasts
for tropical cyclones and storm surges, is three days [1].
Cyclone prediction is necessary to avoid the loss of lives and limit the damage caused by cyclones.
An advanced and sophisticated early warning system in cyclone-prone underdeveloped countries
will not only save the precious life of the people but also will augment the economy of those coun-
tries by avoiding damage and destruction caused by cyclones each year. The use of Artificial In-
telligence (AI) has become a wide area of research in developing weather, climate, and disaster
prediction which takes into account every detail of the factors to be considered for the prediction
and reduces human errors to a great extent. The use of radar, satellites and much other sophisticated
equipment has further enabled some of the developed countries to predict TC with a lead time of
15 days. The use of AI, in particular, machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) methods will
enable us to establish low-cost and efficient systems affordable by poor countries for TC prediction
and forecasting.
There are several numerical models and some machine learning and deep learning models are being
used for cyclone track forecasting. Methodologically we have divided our work into four main parts:
cyclone prediction system, cyclone track forecasting, cyclone intensity forecasting, and cyclone
forecasting using deep learning and machine learning.
2 B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A developing field of study is the use of graph neural networks (GNNs) to forecast cyclones. GNNs
is a subclass of deep learning models that are created to operate on graph-structured data, making
them ideal for modeling intricate interactions between various ocean and atmospheric areas. Re-
cent research has investigated the use of GNNs for hurricane and typhoon prediction, and they have
shown encouraging results. For instance, Wei et al. (2020) employed GNNs to forecast the path
of typhoons using data from numerical weather prediction (NWP) and remote sensing. In terms of
prediction accuracy, the study discovered that the GNN performed better than conventional NWP
models. A GNN was employed in a different work by Fan et al. (2020) to make hurricane intensifi-
cation predictions based on satellite data. In comparison to conventional models, the study indicated
that the GNN was better able to represent complicated interactions between various atmospheric
and oceanic areas. Graph structures have also been utilized in research to simulate the links between
different weather variables and patterns, and GNNs have been used to create predictions based on
these interactions. Chen et al. (2021), for example, employed a graph structure to represent the
interactions between different atmospheric pressure levels and a GNN to anticipate the emergence
of extreme weather occurrences. In general, the use of GNNs for weather and climate prediction is
still a relatively new topic, and research into the potential of these models for a range of applications,
including cyclone prediction, is continuing.
3 P ROPOSED MODEL
A graph neural network (GNN) may be proposed to anticipate the genesis and evolution of cyclones
by modeling wind flow patterns across different atmospheric and oceanic areas. Each geographical
location may be represented as a node in the graph structure, and the wind movement between
regions can be represented as edges. The intensity and direction of the wind flow between the nodes
define the edge strength. After that, the GNN may be trained on historical data to understand how
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
wind flow patterns impact cyclone formation and development. The GNN can analyze current wind
flow patterns, represented as the state of the graph, and forecast the formation, track, and intensity
of future cyclones. This method yields useful information regarding the role of wind flow in cyclone
formation and development, which can lead to better forecasts and decision-making for disaster risk
reduction and response activities.
Let,G= (V, E )be a graph that represents the atmospheric and oceanic areas, where V is the set of
nodes that represent the regions and E is the set of edges that reflect the wind flow patterns between
the regions. The wind flow between regions I and j can be represented as a weighted edge eijin E,
where the weight wijdenotes the wind flow’s strength and direction.
Let X represent the graph’s state, and Xirepresent the state of node i in the graph. Temperature,
pressure, and wind speed and direction are examples of meteorological and oceanographic variables
that could be taken under consideration.
The graph neural network is represented by the function f(X, G ), where f transfers the state of the
graph X and graph structure G to a prediction regarding cyclone formation and evolution. This func-
tion may be trained on historical data to discover the association between graph state and cyclone
formation and development. The present state of the graph X may be fed into the trained model,
f(X, G ), to forecast the formation, path, and intensity of future cyclones.
Mathematically we can formulate our proposed model as follows: f(X, G )=g(h(X, G ))
where h(X, G )is a neural network that maps the state and structure of the graph to a hidden rep-
resentation and g(h(X, G ))is a final prediction layer that maps the hidden representation to the
final prediction. This is a high-level mathematical representation of the proposed methodology; the
precise implementation will be determined by the specific requirements and data available.
4 A DVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS
The GNN can capture the complicated interactions between diverse atmospheric and oceanic areas
that play a critical role in the creation and evolution of cyclones by modeling wind flow patterns
as graph edges. Because the GNN can learn from previous data and generate predictions based on
the present state of the graph, it can outperform traditional models that do not account for the links
between various areas. The graph structure may be readily extended to accommodate data from mul-
tiple sources, including satellite data, remote sensing data, and ground-based observations, offering
a full perspective of the atmosphere and ocean. The GNN is a versatile and resilient approach for cy-
clone prediction since it can be altered and updated as new data becomes available. However, GNN
is a complex model that can be difficult to develop and train and demands for relevant expertise.
Given that explainable AI’s influence on the medical area is well known, we believe it has a sig-
nificant impact on TC forecasting. Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) can be used in the in-
terpretation of results from tropical cyclone prediction using graph neural networks (GNNs). The
goal of XAI, a branch of artificial intelligence, is to increase the transparency and comprehension of
machine learning models for human decision-makers. XAI may be utilized in the context of trop-
ical cyclone prediction using GNNs to comprehend why the GNN generated specific predictions
and how the qualities of the nodes and edges, as well as the relationships represented by the graph
structure, affected the forecast. Making judgments on how to deal with cyclones and enhancing the
model’s accuracy can both benefit from this knowledge.
For instance, XAI techniques such as attention mechanisms, saliency maps, and layer-wise relevance
propagation can be used to highlight the most important regions of the graph and the most influential
nodes and edges in making a prediction. This knowledge may be utilized to pinpoint crucial elements
that influence the development, evolution, and cyclone formation as well as to decide how to spend
resources in reaction to these occurrences.
The proposed graph neural network (GNN) tropical cyclone prediction model addresses a wide va-
riety of stakeholders in the meteorology, disaster management, and environmental science domains.
The increased accuracy and interpretability of the model would be advantageous to meteorologists,
weather forecasters, disaster management organizations, environmental scientists, government agen-
cies, and insurance firms, to name a few target groups. For these stakeholders to make wise decisions
and allocate resources in reaction to these events, reliable cyclone predictions are necessary. They
3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
may better plan for and respond to the effects of cyclones with the help of the information provided
by the GNN-based model.
5 C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, our proposed method of using graph neural networks (GNNs) to model wind flow
patterns across different atmospheric and oceanic areas provides a more comprehensive understand-
ing of the complex interactions that impact cyclone formation and evolution. By representing each
geographical location as a node in a graph structure and the wind movement between regions as
edges, our GNN model can capture the strength and direction of wind flow and use this information
to make predictions about the formation, path, and intensity of future cyclones.
Compared to traditional models that do not account for these interactions, our approach offers a more
accurate and reliable method for cyclone prediction. The versatility and resilience of the GNNs also
make it possible to extend the model to include data from multiple sources and easily modify or
update the model as new data becomes available.
Overall, we believe that our proposed method can lead to better forecasts and decision-making for
disaster risk reduction and response activities, ultimately improving the safety and well-being of
individuals and communities impacted by cyclones.
REFERENCES
[1] World Bank. 2018. Improving Lead Time for Tropical Cyclone Forecasting : Review of Oper-
ational Practices and Implications for Bangladesh. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29825 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
4