Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
TOWARDS A UNIFIED STANDARDS FOR SMART INFRAS -
TRUCTURE DATASETS
Abdulrahman A. Ahmed
Faculty of Computers and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Cairo University
5 Dr. Ahmed Zewail street, Orman, Giza, Egypt. Postal code: 12613
fa.elsayedg@fci-cu.edu.eg
ABSTRACT
Development of smart devices and smart home appliances allowed us to harness
more data about energy patterns inside households, overtime this amount will in-
crease. There are contributions published to address building datasets, working
for objective of energy consumption optimization. Yet there are still factors if in-
cluded could help in understanding problem better. This proposal tries to annotate
missing features that if applied could help in a better understanding energy con-
sumption in smart buildings impact on environment. Second, to have a uniﬁed
standards that help different solutions to be compared properly.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Buildings energy consumption is accounted for a considerable percentage from total energy con-
sumption on electric grid. For example, in US, commercial and residential energy consumption
accounted for around 40% of total energy consumption. Meanwhile in UK, Germany residential
sector accounted for 28%, 26%, of total energy consumption in each country respectively Iskan-
darova & Genus (2019),Grealis et al. (2019). The increase of electronic devices allowed more data
to be gathered about power consumption especially within residential buildings. Though different
data sources have been gathered, still there are missing points to have a machine learning models
work better for optimizing energy consumption. and lacking for agreed standards in optimizing
energy consumption problem makes the problem more harder to attack and solution methods will
not appear on the same basis. Pecan street Inc. dataset collects data for residential area it includes:
type of rooms, number of windows, availability of some devices, etc. and such diversity enabled
different contributions in this area. However, it lacked conclusive indicators for weather conditions
which play important rule in energy consumption and other environmental impact to electric devices.
Social game dataset Konstantakopoulos et al. (2019) addressed the problem form a little different
perspective as it recorded unit features with indicative features for weather conditions. Still we can’t
have full picture of residential energy consumption behavior as it’s a residential building inside uni-
versity campus. In addition to points mentioned, neither of both datasets addressed energy sources
(i.e. how much solar power, wind power, etc. contribute to the electric grid). This proposal tries to
address gaps (between datasets) that could help in better understanding of energy consumption in
smart infrastructure and more uniﬁed standards in comparison.
In the following subsections I’ll discuss brieﬂy main previous datasets that are strongly related to
proposal.
1.1 P ECAN STREET INC. DATASET
A dataset collects different appliances data minute by minute from residential buildings (mainly
Austin, TX). Dataset shows how much each component consumes over the time domain. Dataset
also records how is the size of house, house construction, number of windows, etc. Dataset also
can be combined with records from time of use energy tariffs for energy consumption like used in
Mocanu et al. (2018). Where they implemented two Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) methods
to solve two problems: Reduce load peaks, and minimize cost of energy.
1Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
1.2 S OCIAL GAME DATASET
Dataset in Konstantakopoulos et al. (2019) is collected from residential housing of Nanyang Tech-
nological University. Dataset is comprised from a record of minute by minute for different possible
energy resources including desk light, room light and ceiling fan/air conditioning (a.k.a Heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning (HV AC)) while labeling in data important times for students like
break, midterm , or ﬁnal exam.
The authors extended the work and built web portal so user can interact with his own info about
energy consumption and do actions. While those who can reduce their energy consumption get re-
warded. This gamiﬁcation process allowed to record both the electronic devices behavior and the
human behavior within a non-cooperative game theory framework.
2 P ROPOSAL
Park et al. (2019) in an effort to deﬁne a load shape (e.g. either residential, commercial, etc.)
gathered different data sources in their work. I’ll mention in the following points what I think aimed
dataset must contain both for optimizing energy consumption and dealing with climate change:
Structure of main energy sources within the smart-grid unit(where unit is: city, neighbor-
hood, etc.): how much percentage it’s generated from fossil fuels, solar energy, wind farms,
etc. To assess energy consumption harm to environment. As a big consumption sourced
mainly from renewable energy isn’t a threat as compared relatively to a small consumption
but from fossil fuels.
Uniﬁed energy time step: either it’s second, or minute, etc. Surely it’s better to have data
by seconds but it may be hard due to different technical issues but investigating migration
to minutes will cause feature loss for dataset is necessary (especially for Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks (ANN) models)
Water consumption as an auxiliary data and relation with appliances like heater, dish-
washer, clothes washing machine, etc.
Considering other environmental impact for electrical devices like consumed water and the
effect on clean water resources, Chloroﬂuorocarbon (CFC) emissions from refrigerators,
HV AC, etc.
Augmenting data gathered from personal mobile phones or wearable to predict better indi-
vidual needs and actions. It’ll help indicate better timing of consumption for each unit or
predicting actions like turning on HV AC ( Liu et al. (2019) showed potential for that)
Many of mentioned points could be gathered from different devices or sources yet not included (to
my knowledge) in dataset for optimizing energy consumption. Still there are many limitations to
structure those points. Like risk of compromising personal privacy, or quantifying impacts other
than energy consumption for electrical devices (like polluted water).
3 C ONCLUSION
While there is an advancement in building datasets for smart infrastructure. There are still missing
points to have a better understanding of energy consumption and impact on environment. In this
paper I tried to mention points that once being components in a dataset will help building better
machine learning models to either understand behavior, consumption consequences or optimize not
only energy consumption but also other environmental impacts for electrical devices and home ap-
pliances. Lastly, providing a uniﬁed standards (or at least a group of consistent points) will lead to
better understanding of the problem and clear comparison for different machine learning methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Hari Prasnna Das for his great help in writing this proposal. And CCAI ICLR
mentorship commitee to enable me this such useful opportunity.
2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
REFERENCES
E. Grealis, A. Musch, and H. Rau. The Impact of German Energy Policy on Household Energy Use ,
pp. 21–33. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. ISBN 978-3-030-20339-9.
M. Iskandarova and A. Genus. UK Responses to the Energy Challenge: Dominant Framings and
New Imaginaries , pp. 59–69. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. ISBN 978-3-030-
20339-9.
I. Konstantakopoulos, H. Das, A Barkan, S. He, T. Veeravalli, H. Liu, A. Manasawala, Y . Lin, and
C. Spanos. Design, benchmarking and explainability analysis of a game-theoretic framework
towards energy efﬁciency in smart infrastructure. ArXiv e-prints , 2019.
S. Liu, S Schivano, H. P. Das, M. Jin, and C. J. Spanos. Personal thermal comfort models with
wearable sensors. Building and Environment , 2019.
E. Mocanu, D. C. Mocanu, P. H. Nguyen, A. Liotta, M. E. Webber, M. Gibescu, and J. G. Slootweg.
On-line building energy optimization using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid , pp. 211–229, 2018.
J. Y . Park, X. Yang, C. Miller, P Arjunan, and Z. Nagy. Apples or oranges? identiﬁcation of
fundamental load shape proﬁles for benchmarking buildings using a large and diverse dataset.
Applied Energy , pp. 1280–1295, 2019.
3