Published as a workshop paper at “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Severe Wind Event Prediction with Multi-
variate Physics-Informed Deep Learning
Willa Potosnak, Cristian Challu, Kin G. Olivares, James K. Miller,
Artur Dubrawski
Auton Lab, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{wpotosna, cchallu, kdgutier, mille856, awd }@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Wind turbines play a crucial role in combating climate change by harnessing
the force of the wind to generate clean and renewable energy. One key factor
in ensuring the long-term effectiveness of wind turbines is the reduction of
operating costs due to maintenance. Severe weather events, such as extreme
changes in wind, can damage turbines, resulting in costly maintenance and
economic losses in power production. We propose a preliminary physics-
informed deep learning model to improve predictions of severe wind events
and a multivariate time series extension for this work.
1 Introduction
Wind turbines play a crucial role in combating climate change by harnessing the force of
the wind to generate clean and renewable energy. The energy produced by turbines is
not only sustainable but also does not result in greenhouse gas emissions, which are major
contributors to global warming. As such, wind turbines can help reduce reliance on other
energy sources that produce greenhouse gas emissions and contribute to climate change.
This clean energy impact can help mitigate the adverse effects of climate change, such as
extreme weather events, rising sea levels, and disruptions to ecosystems.
One key factor in ensuring the long-term effectiveness of wind turbines is the reduction of
operating costs due to maintenance. The importance of minimizing turbine need for main-
tenance is twofold. Firstly, it directly contributes to making wind energy more economically
viable. Turbine repairs, replacements, and lost power production time due to wind turbine
shutdowns (WTS) required for maintenance can offset the economic benefits of wind energy.
Secondly, by keeping maintenance costs down, wind energy becomes a financially attractive
option compared to energy sources that are more harmful to the environment. This compet-
itiveness is vital for the widespread adoption of renewable energy, as it encourages businesses
and governments to invest in sustainable practices.
Severe weather events, particularly gusts of wind, pose a significant threat to the structural
integrity of wind turbines. The force exerted by sudden strong winds can lead to exces-
sive strain on the turbine components, potentially causing damage and compromising their
operational efficiency. In response to such adverse weather conditions, turbine manufactur-
ers typically shut down turbines temporarily when the wind speeds exceed predetermined
safety thresholds. By temporarily shutting down wind turbines during severe wind events,
manufacturers aim to safeguard the turbines against damage, ensuring the longevity of the
equipment and minimizing the need for costly repairs.
Using predetermined safety thresholds for WTS is a reactive approach to prevent turbines
from operating under conditions that could lead to structural stress or mechanical failure.
However, a reactive approach is not optimal as waiting until a severe wind gust is imminent
before taking action can still result in physical turbine damage. To prevent turbine damage
due to severe wind events, a proactive WTS is needed to shutdown the turbine prior to the
event. However, accurate event time estimates are crucial to mitigate lost power production
due to premature WTS.Published as a workshop paper at “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Machine learning (ML) can enable proactive WTS by providing accurate predictions of
severe wind events. By leveraging historical weather data, real-time atmospheric conditions,
and advanced algorithms, deep learning models can be used to predict the time until a severe
wind gust reaches a turbine, or time-to-event, allowing for proactive and strategic WTS.
2 Related Work
Prior work to predict severe wind events has predominantly focused on leveraging fore-
casting models based on historical wind speed data [7]. Training ML models with high-
frequency data becomes particularly crucial in domains like wind energy, where the need
for fine-resolution predictions is imperative for optimizing turbine power output. Forecast-
ing high-frequency data, such as on the scale of seconds, presents challenges in time-series
analysis due to inherent noise associated with data at such fine temporal resolutions. Rapid
fluctuations and short-lived patterns characterize second-level data, making it vulnerable to
unpredictable external factors. Traditional forecasting models may struggle to accurately
capture these dynamics, resulting in increased forecast errors.
Labeled data provides a means to train ML models on specific events of interest, which can
mitigate model overfitting to noise and artifacts. Temporal classification is one approach
to predict weather events using labeled time series data [1]. However, its application in
practice may be hindered by several factors, including subjective determination of a model
score threshold to define event classes. An incorrectly low threshold can result in false
positive predictions and premature WTS while an incorrectly high threshold can result in
false negative predictions and no WTS. Additionally, the scarcity of severe weather events
in data can result in label imbalances within the dataset, leading to suboptimal performance
in accurately predicting rare but critical events.
Time-to-event, or survival, analysis is an alternative ML approach that leverages labeled
event data to predict time until an event. Generally, time-to-event models, such as Random
Survival Forests (RSF) [2] and Deep Survival Machines (DSM) [3], require the provision
of specific times for the model to evaluate. This characteristic renders these model less
appropriate for applications that require high-resolution timescales. Similar to temporal
classification, time-to-event models can also suffer errors based on the subjective determina-
tion of the model score threshold. Furthermore, assumptions, such as the independence of
survival times and censoring mechanisms, might be violated by the complex interactions and
dependencies inherent in weather patterns. This highlights the need for tailored approaches
for time-to-event prediction concerning weather events.
3 Proposed Methods
Preliminary Model We propose a preliminary physics-informed deep learning model
that can improve time-to-event predictions of severe wind events affecting wind turbines as
shown in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has developed a physics-based
deep learning time-to-event prediction model for severe weather events, such as wind.
Incorporating fundamental principles from physics in deep learning models enables the model
to develop a systematic comprehension of weather dynamics. Moreover, this incorporation
can function as a regularization technique, guiding the model to produce more precise pre-
dictions that adhere to physical constraints. The behavior of wind can be elucidated through
fundamental principles of physics in the form of equation d=vtthat relates distance d,
velocity, v, and time, t. By rearranging this equation to t=d
v, we gain a valuable tool
for estimating the time it takes for a weather event to reach subsequent turbines. For ex-
ample, when a weather event is initially monitored at a specific turbine, the distance, d,
between this monitoring point and subsequent turbines, as well as the velocity, v, of the wind
recorded at the event, can be used to calculate the time it will take for the weather event
to impact subsequent turbines. Furthermore, the wind velocity recorded at the initial time
of a wind event may vary for subsequent turbines due wind direction and terrain, among
other factors. To account for discrepancies in velocity, we extend the equation t=d
vtoPublished as a workshop paper at “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
incorporate a velocity scaling factor, s, that is learned using a deep learning model, fθ(x):
ˆt=d
v·s. (1)
To learn s, we employ a fully-connected Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [4; 5] as fθ(x) with
sigmoid activations. Here, x∈RN×Cis a feature vector, where Nis the number of samples,
or turbines, and Cis the number of features.
Preliminary results demonstrate that a physics-based time-to-event model outperforms both
purely physics and ML baselines in terms of Mean Absolute Error (MAE) (standard devi-
ation) as shown in Table 1. More information regarding data, baselines, model hyperpa-
rameters, and additional results can be found in Appendix A.
Baselines Proposed
ˆt= Avg. t ˆt=d
vˆt=dt
vtˆt=fθ(x) ˆt= DSM( x) ˆt=d
v·s
45.57 (7.03) 6.79 (6.19) 5.03 (4.45) 12.72 (6.94) 6.62 (5.43) 2.61 (4.02)
Table 1: Preliminary Results
0.0 1.11 2.22 3.33 4.44 5.55 6.67 7.78
Kilometers0.01.112.223.334.445.56Kilometers
Wind Turbine Park
Wind Speed Vector
Haversine Distance
Wind Turbine
Initial Turbine Wind Event
Figure 1: Principles of physics in the form of
equations governing motion explained by dis-
tance, velocity, and time can inform ML ap-
proaches for time-to-event prediction.Multivariate Time Series Extension
The preliminary model has demonstrated
improved performance over baselines while
only leveraging aggregate information 1-
minute prior to the first turbine event.
However, wind speed exhibits time-varying
characteristics. As such, we propose to
extend our preliminary physics-informed
time-to-event model to leverage time se-
ries data across multiple turbines to infer a
time-dependent velocity representation, or
scaling factor, s. By leveraging time se-
ries data across turbines, the model may be
able to capture the complex dynamics of the
storm system as it moves through the park
and generate more accurate velocity repre-
sentations.
Graph Attention Networks (GATs) [6] offer
a promising deep learning approach to har-
ness spatial-temporal information recorded
across wind turbines. Given a graph, G=
{N,E}, individual turbines would be repre-
sented as nodes, N, connected by edges, E. Despite the potential of graphical models like
GATs, they may necessitate substantial data for effective training where the availability of
severe weather event data could be limited. Leveraging fundamental principles from physics
may reduce data requirements and improve model convergence while maintaining predic-
tive accuracy. The utility of GATs for this challenge lies in its ability to assign different
weights to different neighboring nodes. As such, a physics-based graphical model can be
employed to learn relevant neighboring turbines for which to inform time-dependent velocity
representations used for time-to-event prediction of wind events.
4 Conclusions
We proposed a physics-informed multivariate deep learning model for predicting severe wind
events. Our preliminary results demonstrate the potential effectiveness of our proposed
approach for implementing proactive WTS. Implementing such a model in practice could
reduce turbine operating costs due to power production losses, maintenance, and premature
WTS, which can help support wind turbines as a financially attractive clean and renewable
energy source.Published as a workshop paper at “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
References
[1] Shubhi Harbola and Volker Coors. Deep learning model for wind forecasting: Classifi-
cation analyses for temporal meteorological data. pages 211–224, 2022.
[2] Hemant Ishwaran, Udaya B. Kogalur, Eugene H. Blackstone, and Michael S. Lauer.
Random survival forests. The Annals of Applied Statistics , 2(3), September 2008.
[3] Chirag Nagpal, Xinyu Li, and Artur Dubrawski. Deep survival machines: Fully para-
metric survival regression and representation learning for censored data with competing
risks. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , 25(8):3163–3175, 2021.
[4] Vinod Nair and Jeoffrey E. Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann
machines. In ICML-23 , 2010.
[5] Frank Rosenblatt. The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage and
organization in the brain. Psychological Review , 65(6):386—-408, 1958.
[6] Petar Veliˇ ckovi´ c, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Li` o,
and Yoshua Bengio. Graph attention networks, 2018.
[7] Bo Yang, Linen Zhong, Jingbo Wang, Hongchun Shu, Xiaoshun Zhang, Tao Yu, and
Sun Liming. State-of-the-art one-stop handbook on wind forecasting technologies: An
overview of classifications, methodologies, and analysis. Journal of Cleaner Production ,
283, 2021.Published as a workshop paper at “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
A Appendix
A.1 Data
Preliminary work was performed on a wind turbine dataset consisting of 50 turbines with
1 month of data sampled at 5 Hz. The data was downsampled to 0.1 Hz (10 second times-
tamps) to facilitate processing data with ML models.
A severe wind event was defined as the first timestamp with windspeed greater than 20
meters per second. Following events in the same 24-hour period were considered part of
the same wind event. Several wind events were observed for each turbine within a 1-month
period as shown in Figure 2. Data from the first 3 wind events across turbines prior to
day 22 were used to train the model and the wind event on day 22 was used for the final
evaluation to maintain temporal ordering and prevent data leakage.
Features used to train the ML models consist of meteorological data including, ambient
temperature, wind speed and wind direction, recorded at the initial event time as well as
distance and angle between turbines.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Time (Days)5101520253035Wind Speed (m/s)
Severe Wind Event
Figure 2: Several wind events were observed for each turbine within a 1-month period.
A.2 Baselines
We evaluate 5 baseline models including 2 physics-based models and 2 ML models:
Average Heuristic
•Avg. t: The average time-to-event for events 1-3 was used to estimate ˆt.
Physics-based Models
•ˆt=d
v: Time-to-event, ˆtwas predicted based on the velocity, v, recorded at the
turbine that experienced an event prior to other turbines and the Haversine distance,
dbetween the event turbine and subsequent turbines in the park.
•ˆt=dt
vt: This physics-based model is designed to emulate a real-time monitoring
system that continually updates predictions as soon as a wind event impacts a
new turbine. Time-to-event, ˆt, was predicted based on the velocity, v, recorded at
the turbine that experienced an event prior to other turbines and the Haversine
distance, dbetween the event turbine and subsequent turbines in the park. For
each subsequent turbine to experience the event, the velocity and distance from the
last turbine was updated and used to generate new predictions for turbines yet to
experience the event or be shutdown by prior time-to-event predictions.
ML Models
•ˆt=fθ(x): A fully-connected Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [4; 5] with ReLU acti-
vations was used to predict Time-to-event, ˆt, given covariates, x.Published as a workshop paper at “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
•Deep Survival Machines (DSM) [3]: DSM is a survival analysis model that esti-
mates the conditional distribution P(T > t|X=x) as a mixture over k parametric
distributions using representation of the individual covariates, x, learned with an
MLP. The model outputs the likelihood that an event has not yet occurred at a
specified time, t, given covariates, x. We take time where P(T > t|X=x) = 0.5 as
the estimated time-to-event based on a decision threshold of 0.5.
A.3 Hyperparameters
Hyperparameter selection was performed using using 3-fold cross validation blocked by
grouped wind events across turbines. Final hyperparameters were selected that minimized
mean squared error across held-out folds. A table outlining hyperparameter options for the
ˆt=fθ(x) baseline and proposed preliminary model are listed below:
Hyperparameter Considered Values
Learning rate {1e-3, 1e-2 }
Number of layers {2, 3}
Hidden size {64, 128 }
Batch size 32
Training steps 5000
Table 2: Common hyperparameter search space
A.4 Additional Results
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (Minutes)0510152025Wind Speed (m/s)16.5 min.0.2 min.ML Physics Hybrid Model: t=d
vs
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (Minutes)0510152025Wind Speed (m/s)11.6 min.3.9 min.Physics Model: t=dt
vt
Wind Event
Predicted Event
Inference Time
Time Difference
Figure 3: Comparing both physics and ML physics hybrid models for turbine example #1,
the ML Physics Hybrid model (top), ˆt=d
v·s, provides a more accurate event prediction and
a longer lead time from model inference to predicted event.Published as a workshop paper at “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (Minutes)0510152025Wind Speed (m/s)16.1 min.0.2 min.ML Physics Hybrid Model: t=d
vs
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (Minutes)0510152025Wind Speed (m/s)11.0 min.4.2 min.Physics Model: t=dt
vt
Wind Event
Predicted Event
Inference Time
Time Difference
Figure 4: Comparing both physics and ML physics hybrid models for turbine example #2,
the ML Physics Hybrid model (top), ˆt=d
v·s, provides a more accurate event prediction and
a longer lead time from model inference to predicted event.
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (Minutes)0510152025Wind Speed (m/s)14.0 min.0.7 min.ML Physics Hybrid Model: t=d
vs
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (Minutes)0510152025Wind Speed (m/s)9.4 min.2.8 min.Physics Model: t=dt
vt
Wind Event
Predicted Event
Inference Time
Time Difference
Figure 5: Comparing both physics and ML physics hybrid models for turbine example #3,
the ML Physics Hybrid model (top), ˆt=d
v·s, provides a more accurate event prediction and
a longer lead time from model inference to predicted event.