Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
EXPLAINING ZEOLITE SYNTHESIS -STRUCTURE RE-
LATIONSHIPS USING AGGREGATED SHAP A NALYSIS
Elton Pan, Zach Jensen, Rafael G ´omez-Bombarelli, & Elsa Olivetti
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{eltonpan,zjensen,rafagb,elsao }@mit.edu
Soonhyoung Kwon, Mingrou Xie, Yuriy Roman
Department of Chemical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{s1105hk,mrx,yroman }@mit.eduManuel Moliner
Instituto de Tecnolog ´ıa Qu ´ımica, Universitat Polit `ecnica
de Val `encia-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient ´ıficas
Valencia, Spain
mmoliner@itq.upv.es
ABSTRACT
Zeolites, crystalline aluminosilicate materials with well-defined porous structures,
have emerged as versatile materials with applications in carbon capture. Hy-
drothermal synthesis is a widely used method for zeolite production, offering
control over crystallinity and and pore size. However, the intricate interplay of
synthesis parameters necessitates a comprehensive understanding to optimize the
synthesis process. We train a supervised classification machine learning model
on ZeoSyn (a dataset of zeolite synthesis routes) to predict the zeolite framework
product given a synthesis route. Subsequently, we leverage SHapley Additive Ex-
planations (SHAP) to reveal key synthesis-structure relationships in zeolites. To
that end, we introduce an aggregation SHAP approach to extend such analysis to
explain the formation of composite building units (CBUs) of zeolites. Analysis at
this unprecedented scale sheds light on key synthesis parameters driving zeolite
crystallization.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Zeolites are nanoporous, crystalline aluminosilicate materials with a wide range of industrial appli-
cations including catalysis, separations, and carbon capture Davis (2002); Boer et al. (2023). While
thousands of potential zeolite structures are thought to be thermodynamically accessible Pophale
et al. (2011), only about 260 have been synthesized, highlighting a synthesis bottleneck to zeolite
discovery and deployment. The synthesis of zeolites synthesis is intricate, with numerous vari-
ables influencing the resultant zeolite structure Corma & Davis (2004), such as types and amounts
of framework elements, the presence of inorganic and organic cations, structure-directing agents,
mineralizing agents and hydrothermal conditions. Davis (2002) However, knowledge of the holistic
interplay between these factors across the entire field is lacking. Machine learning has the poten-
tial in generalizing some of these relationshipsCorma et al. (2006); Serra et al. (2007); Jensen et al.
(2019); Muraoka et al. (2019) but have been limited to subsections of the zeolite design space due
to a lack of data.
We leverage ZeoSyn (Fig. S3), a comprehensive dataset of 23,925 zeolite synthesis routes for >200
unique zeolite frameworks (an order of magnitude larger than all previously published zeolite syn-
thesis datasets). We train a supervised classification machine learning model on ZeoSyn to predict
zeolite framework products given a synthesis route. We employ SHapley Additive Explanations
(SHAP) to reveal key synthesis parameters driving the formation of over 200 zeolite frameworks
and their constituent composite building units (CBUs), and show potential applications in phase-
selective and intergrowth synthesis. Analysis at this unprecedented level of scale is a step toward an
improved understanding of zeolite synthesis-structure relationships, which could potentially guide
and accelerate the discovery of new zeolite frameworks.
1Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
2 M ETHODS
2.1 Z EOLITE FRAMEWORK PREDICTION MODEL
We train a supervised classification model using random forest to predict a zeolite framework prod-
uct (three-letter code eg. KFI in Fig. 1a) given a synthesis recipe. The model takes in a 43-
dimensional vector as input where each element corresponds to either gel composition (eg. Si, Al, P,
etc), reaction condition (eg. crystallization time), or descriptors of organic structure-directing agent
(OSDA). The OSDA plays an important role in zeolite synthesis as it as a template, guiding the
arrangement of building blocks to form a porous zeolite structure. We featurize the OSDA using
its physicochemical descriptors (eg. molecular volume and 2D shape descriptors) of the organic
molecule Schwalbe-Koda et al. (2021). The full list of OSDA features and their descriptions can be
found in Table S1.
2.2 SHAP ANALYSIS OF ZEOLITE FORMATION
To analyze the outcomes of the classification model (depicted in Fig. 1a, we employ SHAP Lundberg
& Lee (2017), which is a generalized measure for the impact of features. SHAP values quantify the
relative importance of a specific feature and its impact on classification. We calculate SHAP values
at two levels: 1) Framework-level SHAP quantifies the impact of synthesis parameters on the
formation of a zeolite framework, based on the predicted probabilities by the classifier. 2) CBU-
level SHAP quantifies the impact of synthesis parameters on the formation of a composite building
unit (CBU). To obtain CBU-level SHAP values, we employ an aggregation approach as follows:
Aggregated SHAP LetSf∈Rn×mbe the framework-level SHAP matrix of framework fwith
nobservations and mfeatures. The CBU-level SHAP matrix SCBU is given by aggregating
framework-level SHAP matrices:
SCBU =X
f∈FCBUSf (1)
where FCBU is the set of synthesized frameworks containing a specific CBU according to the IZA
databasebae (2021). For example, to obtain CBU-level SHAP matrix Ssodcorresponding to the sod
CBU, we determine the set of frameworks containing sod,Fsod={FAU,SOD,LTA}. Subsequently,
the CBU-level SHAP is given by Ssod=SFAU+SSOD+SLTA. Intuitively, by summing up Sf
corresponding to frameworks containing the CBU, this aggregation approach amplifies SHAP values
corresponding to common features that highly impact CBU formation, while suppressing SHAP
values corresponding to the features that do not have much impact. This effectively shifts the SHAP
analysis from a framework-centric to a CBU-centric view, allowing for an understanding of factors
driving the building units that make up zeolites.
3 R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1 Z EOLITE FRAMEWORK PREDICTION MODEL
The model is evaluated on held-out, unseen test syntheses on the framework prediction task, with a
model accuracy of 0.73. This performance is surprisingly strong, as our model has the challenging
task of predicting 1 out of 220 possible zeolite frameworks. The confusion matrix shown in Fig.
1b shows that the majority of the predictions lie along the diagonal of the matrix, meaning that
the majority of predictions (0.68 – 0.88) are correct. As shown by the high-intensity off-diagonal
elements, the majority of the errors made by the model are misclassifications as another framework
(”Others”) or dense/amorphous dense (”Failed”). The model also shows strong performance in
discriminating different pore sizes as shown in Fig. S6 with high accuracies of 0.78 – 0.86.
3.2 R ATIONALIZATION OF SYNTHESIS -STRUCTURE RELATIONSHIPS IN ZEOLITES
The synthesis knowledge learned by the classification model can be analyzed to rationalize the im-
pact of synthesis parameters on the formation of a specific zeolite framework. For each prediction,
SHAP values are calculated to determine the impact of each synthesis parameter on the probability
2Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Figure 1: Interpretable ML framework for explaining synthesis-structure relationships in zeo-
lites (a) Schematic of zeolite phase predictor model. Given synthesis parameters, the model fθpre-
dicts the resultant framework (eg. KFI). The predicted framework probabilities are used to calculate
framework-level SHAP values. In addition, CBU-level SHAP values of composite building units
(CBUs) are obtained by aggregated SHAP method. (b)Normalized confusion matrix of phase pre-
dictor model. Here, we have selected 1 representative small ( CHA ), medium ( MFI ), large ( *BEA ),
and extra-large pore ( UTL ) framework. ”Others” refers to all other frameworks while ”Failed” refers
to amorphous/dense phases. (c)An example of a framework-level SHAP analysis quantifying the
positive/negative impact of synthesis parameters on the probability of LTA framework formation.
of forming a specific zeolite framework (Fig. 1c). For instance, the first row uncovers a physically-
grounded trend that low crystallization temperatures (blue points) have positive SHAP values (in-
creases probability of LTA formation), while high temperatures (orange points) have negative SHAP
values (decreases probability of LTA formation). We quantify the impact of synthesis parameters
at two different levels of zeolite structure: 1) Framework-level SHAP shows the positive/negative
impact of a synthesis parameter on the probability of crystallizing a specific zeolite framework (eg.
KFI in Fig. 1a) 2) CBU-level SHAP shows the positive/negative impact of a synthesis parameter
on the probability of forming a structure that contains a specific composite building unit (CBU) (eg.
paucage in Fig. 1a)
3.2.1 F RAMEWORK -LEVEL SHAP
Framework-level SHAP identifies the most important synthesis parameters driving the formation of
a specific zeolite framework. Here, we consider all 43 inputs into the model fθand show only the
top 10 most important synthesis parameters (in descending order) for specific frameworks as shown
in Fig. 2a. We note the two different types of synthesis parameters: 1) inorganic, which relate to
composition of the inorganic components of the synthesis gel (eg. Si, Al, OH, F etc) 2) OSDA,
which relate to the organic template (eg. OSDA volume, OSDA rotatable bonds etc). Consequently,
this allows us to categorize each zeolite framework as a one of the following types: 2a: 1) Gel-
dominated 2) OSDA-dominated synthesis .
Gel-dominated synthesis These frameworks have syntheses where inorganic components play a
more crucial role, with few ( ≤3 out of top 10) OSDA-related parameters. Fig. 2a shows two of
such frameworks ( CAN ,KFI). In terms of the gel composition, CAN andKFI share the common
3Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Figure 2: (a) Framework-level SHAP analysis revealing the top 10 (out of 43) most important
synthesis parameters favoring the formation of specific frameworks. Each framework belongs to
one of the following types of synthesis: 1) Gel-dominated synthesis ( CAN ,KFI) where most top
parameters are inorganic-related, 2) OSDA-dominated synthesis ( ISV,ITE) where most top param-
eters are OSDA-related, and 3) balanced synthesis ( IWW ,RUT ) where even attribution is given to
inorganic and OSDA parameters. Every point is an individual synthesis colored by the value of syn-
thesis parameter. (b) CBU-level SHAP analysis (obtained from aggregated SHAP) of large CBUs
showing OSDA parameters favoring their formation.
trend that both are favored by high levels of mineralizing agent OH. CAN formation seems to be
favored by high Na and low K Barnes et al. (1999). Conversely, KFI formation follows the opposite
trend, where it appears to be favored by low Na and high K Han et al. (2021). In terms of reaction
conditions, high and low crystallization temperatures favor CAN (due to high framework density)
andKFI, respectively Dusselier & Davis (2018).
OSDA-dominated synthesis These frameworks have syntheses where OSDA features are more
important. As shown in Fig. 2a, both ISV andITE have all of their top synthesis parameters related
to the OSDA. One can immediately observe that OSDAs favoring these two frameworks have low
asphericity (indicating the need for a spherical OSDA), high volume, and few number of rotatable
4Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
bonds (indicating rigidity). However, differences do exist; ITE formation is associated with high
values of OSDA NPR 1 (first normalized principal moment of inertia ratio) with the orange points
clearly on the right hand side, while this effect is not present in ISV formation where orange and
blue points overlap one another. Moreover, unlike ITE,ISV requires higher amounts of OSDA.
We hypothesize that physicochemical OSDA insights could be used to guide the design of optimal
OSDAs that target a specific framework.
3.2.2 CBU- LEVEL SHAP
Zeolites adopt a hierarchical structure where CBUs combine to form the zeolite frameworks them-
selves. The formation of large CBUs are influenced by OSDA parameters due to the need for a
structure-directing effect by OSDAs. Fig. 2b shows a series of large CBUs with an increasing as-
pect ratio ( pau<los<ave<aft). In the first row, we discover a clear relationship between aspect
ratio of the CBU and OSDA asphericity (a measure of the deviation from sphere). For pau, low
OSDA asphericity gives rise to positive SHAP values, indicating the need for a spherical OSDA.
Indeed, this is due to the symmetrical shape of the paucage. As we transition to higher aspect ratios
(aft), higher levels of OSDA asphericity (orange) are needed to drive its formation, indicating the
increasing need for longer, asymmetric molecules to template CBUs.
3.2.3 A PPLICATIONS OF SHAP ANALYSIS
We showcase the utility of the aforementioned SHAP analysis on an important application in zeo-
lite synthesis: Competing phases We consider the most common pair of competing phases in the
ZeoSyn dataset, TON &MFI (Fig. S5), where these 2 frameworks are frequently formed in the
same synthesis. MFI is a framework that often appears as a competing phase due to its ease of
synthesis and wide synthesis window. Here, we consider achieving phase-selective of TON in the
absence of MFI . Fig. S9a shows the framework-level SHAP for TON andMFI frameworks. In or-
der to achieve a phase-selective synthesis of TON , one may inspect the impact of OSDA spherocity
(first row) on the two frameworks, which reveals opposing effects on the frameworks: Clearly, an
OSDA with low spherocity promotes TON formation while suppressing MFI as indicated by the
rightmost column. As such, this showcases framework-level SHAP as a powerful tool for identify-
ing promising synthesis ”knobs” and recommends the appropriate direction to tune these ”knobs”
for phase-selective synthesis.
4 C ONCLUSION
In this work, we leverage SHAP analysis to uncover the impact of the key synthesis parameters
for a zeolites. Furthermore, we introduce an aggregated SHAP approach to extend this analysis
to the building unit level, allowing understanding of synthesis parameters at a more fundamental
level. Furthermore, this approach has been shown to be useful for the rational design of synthesis
parameters for phase-selective synthesis. It is hoped that such rationalization would pave the way
for data-driven discovery of zeolitic materials for potential applications in carbon capture.
REFERENCES
Database of zeolite structures. http://www. iza-structure. org/databases/ , 2021.
Mark C Barnes, Jonas Addai-Mensah, and Andrea R Gerson. The mechanism of the sodalite-to-
cancrinite phase transformation in synthetic spent bayer liquor. Microporous and Mesoporous
Materials , 31(3):287–302, 1999.
Dina G Boer, Jort Langerak, and Paolo P Pescarmona. Zeolites as selective adsorbents for co2
separation. ACS Applied Energy Materials , 6(5):2634–2656, 2023.
Avelino Corma and Mark E Davis. Issues in the synthesis of crystalline molecular sieves: Towards
the crystallization of low framework-density structures. ChemPhysChem , 5(3):304–313, 2004.
Avelino Corma, Manuel Moliner, Jose M Serra, Pedro Serna, Mar ´ıa J D ´ıaz-Caba ˜nas, and Laurent A
Baumes. A new mapping/exploration approach for ht synthesis of zeolites. Chemistry of materi-
als, 18(14):3287–3296, 2006.
5Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Mark E Davis. Ordered porous materials for emerging applications. Nature , 417(6891):813–821,
2002.
Michiel Dusselier and Mark E Davis. Small-pore zeolites: synthesis and catalysis. Chemical re-
views , 118(11):5265–5329, 2018.
Shichao Han, Xiaomin Tang, Lijin Wang, Yanhang Ma, Wei Chen, Qinming Wu, Ling Zhang, Qi-
uyan Zhu, Xiangju Meng, Anmin Zheng, et al. Potassium-directed sustainable synthesis of new
high silica small-pore zeolite with kfi structure (zjm-7) as an efficient catalyst for nh3-scr reaction.
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental , 281:119480, 2021.
Zach Jensen, Edward Kim, Soonhyoung Kwon, Terry ZH Gani, Yuriy Roman-Leshkov, Manuel
Moliner, Avelino Corma, and Elsa Olivetti. A machine learning approach to zeolite synthesis
enabled by automatic literature data extraction. ACS central science , 5(5):892–899, 2019.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances
in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017.
Koki Muraoka, Yuki Sada, Daiki Miyazaki, Watcharop Chaikittisilp, and Tatsuya Okubo. Linking
synthesis and structure descriptors from a large collection of synthetic records of zeolite materials.
Nature communications , 10(1):1–11, 2019.
Ramdas Pophale, Phillip A Cheeseman, and Michael W Deem. A database of new zeolite-like
materials. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics , 13(27):12407–12412, 2011.
Daniel Schwalbe-Koda, Soonhyoung Kwon, Cecilia Paris, Estefania Bello-Jurado, Zach Jensen,
Elsa Olivetti, Tom Willhammar, Avelino Corma, Yuriy Rom ´an-Leshkov, Manuel Moliner, et al.
A priori control of zeolite phase competition and intergrowth with high-throughput simulations.
Science , pp. eabh3350, 2021.
Jose Manuel Serra, Laurent Allen Baumes, Manuel Moliner, Pedro Serna, and Avelino Corma. Zeo-
lite synthesis modelling with support vector machines: a combinatorial approach. Combinatorial
chemistry & high throughput screening , 10(1):13–24, 2007.
A A PPENDIX
Figure 3: The ZeoSyn dataset.
6Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Table 1: Physicochemical descriptors of OSDAs.
OSDA descriptor Description
Asphericity An anisometry descriptor for the deviation from the spheri-
cal shape
Axis 1 Two-dimensional (2D) shape descriptors of molecule calcu-
lated by projecting the atomic coordinates into a 2D space
based on a principal component analysis (PCA) of the posi-
tions. The range of the distribution of points in each princi-
pal component is reported as the axis of the conformer. Axis
1 is reported as the larger axis, whereas Axis 2 is the smaller
axis
Axis 2 See above
Charge Formal charge of molecule
SASA Solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) is the surface area
of a molecule that is accessible to a solvent
Molecular weight Molecular mass of molecule
NPR 1 Normalized principal moments ratio (I1/I3) where I is prin-
cipal moment of inertia
NPR 2 Normalized principal moments ratio (I2/I3) where I is prin-
cipal moment of inertia
Rotatable bonds Number of rotatable bonds in the molecule. A measure of
molecular flexibility.
PMI 1 Principal moments of inertia (PMI) are physical quantities
related to the rotational dynamics of a molecule.
I =AX
i=1mi·r2
i (2)
where Ais the number of atoms, and miis the atomic mass
andriis the perpendicular distance from the chosen axis of
theith atom of the molecule
PMI 2 See above
PMI 3 See above
Spherocity Spherocity index of molecule
V olume Molecular volume calculated by using a grid-encoding of
the molecular shape using a grid spacing of 0.2 ˚A and 2.0 ˚A
of margin for the boxes
7Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Figure 4: Number of synthetic routes for small, medium, large and extra-large pore frameworks in
the dataset. Each framework is further broken down into its constituent zeotypes by color.
Figure 5: Number of synthesis routes with competing phases. y-axis is the major zeolite product,
x-axis is the minor zeolite product.
8Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Figure 6: Normalized confusion matrix of phase predictor model. Here, we aggregate frame-
works according to small, medium, large and extra-large pore frameworks. ”Failed” refers to amor-
phous/dense phases.
Figure 7: The (a)spherical cavities in RUT (b) long channels in IWW explain the difference in
OSDA spherocity favoring the two frameworks: IWW is favored by spherical OSDAs while RUT
is favored by longer OSDAs.
9Published as a workshop paper at ”Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”, ICLR 2024
Figure 8: CBU-level SHAP analysis of small CBUs showing top 10 most important inorganic pa-
rameters (y-axis) contributing to their formation.
Figure 9: Application of framework-level SHAP on competing phases ( TON andMFI ). The left-
and right-most columns describe the optimal value of OSDA parameter for maximizing formation
probability of TON andMFI , respectively. For example, the first row shows opposing effects of
OSDA spherocity: High OSDA spherocity promotes MFI formation while suppressing TON (and
vice versa).
10