Towards Ecological Network Analysis with
Gromov-Wasserstein Distances
Kai M. Hung
Dept. of Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
kai.hung@rice.eduAlex G. Zalles
Dept. of Computational &
Applied Mathematics &
Operations Research
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
agz2@rice.eduAnn E. Finneran
Dept. of Biosciences
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
annie.finneran@rice.edu
Lydia Beaudrot
Dept. of Biosciences
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
beaudrot@rice.eduCésar A. Uribe
Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
cauribe@rice.edu
Abstract
Climate change is driving the widespread redistribution of species with cas-
cading effects on predators and their prey. Formally comparing ecological
interaction networks is a critical step towards understanding the impact of
climate change on ecosystem functioning, yet current methods for ecolog-
ical network analysis are unable to do so. We propose using the Gromov-
Wasserstein (GW) metric for quantifying dissimilarity between ecological
networks. We demonstrate the corresponding optimal transport plans of
this distance can be interpreted as species functional alignment between food
webs. Our results show that GW transport plans align species from different
mammal communities consistent with ecological understanding. Further-
more, we illustrate extensions of the GW distance to notions of averages and
factorization over ecological networks. Ultimately, we propose the foundation
for a novel interpretable topological data analysis framework to inform future
ecological research and conservation management.
1 Introduction
Figure 1: Location of the 170
mammal food webs across dif-
ferent biomes of Sub-Saharan
Africa. See Appendix A.1 for
details.Predator-prey interactions play a critical role in the mainte-
nance of biodiversity by promoting stability (Estes et al., 2011;
Landi et al., 2018). However, climate change causes many
species to shift their geographic ranges as they track preferred
environmental conditions (Parmesan, 2006), thereby altering
ecological communities and the interactions between species
within them (Williams and Jackson, 2007). Investigating
how food web topology varies along environmental gradients
can inform our understanding of future food webs (Tylianakis
and Morris, 2017), promoting interests in analyzing ecological
networks from a data-driven graph machine learning perspec-
tive (Poisot et al., 2016; Tuia et al., 2022).
Despite widespread community interest in studying ecological networks, existing graph
analysis and comparison methods (Tantardini et al., 2019) are either computationally
intractable (Ghosh et al., 2018), not interpretable (Liu et al., 2022), dependent on extensive
hyperparameter tuning and selection of motifs (e.g., graphlets (Sarajlić et al., 2016), graph
kernels (Ghosh et al., 2018), and graph neural networks), or only applicable to same-sized
1networks (Gera et al., 2018). Moreover, it remains an open problem to fully characterize the
structural differences among ecological networks (Pellissier et al., 2018).
This paper proposes using the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance to quantify dissimilarity
between ecological networks. In the context of networks, the GW distance is a pseudomet-
ric (Chowdhury and Mémoli, 2019) with competitive empirical performance on tasks such
as graph clustering (Chowdhury and Needham, 2021), graph partitioning (Xu et al., 2019),
and graph factorization (Xu, 2020). More importantly, unlike current spectral methods
based on graph Laplacians (Wilson and Zhu, 2008), GW compares graphs of different sizes,
which is critically important for ecological networks because communities support different
numbers of species. GW distances have corresponding optimal transport plans describing
how the nodes are mapped between graphs. In the ecological context, this optimal transport
plan can reveal corresponding functional roles between two species in different food webs.
Furthermore, GW distance can be extended into a suite of distance-based machine learning
algorithms onto ecological networks.
The main contributions of this paper are described as follows:
1. Measure graph characterization: Computing the GW distance requires a probability
distribution representation of the graphs. We formalize the viable configurations, discuss
their ecological relevance, and contrast their performance.
2. GW for topology representations: We present empirical evidence that the GW
distance clusters synthetic graphs of varying sizes into groups corresponding to its topology:
paths, cycles, and stars. Furthermore, we show that the GW distance produces geometrically
intuitive transport plans and barycenters.
3. GW on food webs: We validate our proposed method by analyzing 170 Sub-Saharan
mammal communities. We first illustrate how the optimal transport matrix successfully
maps many species to themselves in a pair of food webs with many shared species. We also
identify mismatched species based on their functional similarities as understood in ecology.
Furthermore, we extend our analyses to Fréchet Mean and Graph Factorization over food
webs, showcasing their applicability to ecology. We attached our results in the appendix due
to space constraints.
2 Gromov-Wasserstein for Ecological Networks
In this section, we formally define configurations of probability distributions on graphs
as required by computing the network GW distance. Their ecological interpretations and
trade-offs follow the definition.
2.1 Measure Networks with Ecological Interpretations
As an instance of optimal transport metrics (Peyré et al., 2019), the GW distance quantifies
minimal transportation cost between probability distributions that live in different sample
spaces(i.e., withdifferentnumberofnodesinthecontextofgraphs)(Mémoli,2011). Applying
GW distance to networks requires characterizing them as measure networks , i.e., a probability
distribution over the network. Formally, given a simple directed graph G= (V, E)with n
nodes and medges, we define the measure network asMG:= (pG, wG)where pGis the node
distribution and wG:V×V→Ris a bounded, real-valued edge weight function. Without
loss of generality, we consider uniform anddegreenode distribution, as well as the adjacency
andshortest path edge weight functions. Specifically, the uniform node distribution allocates
each node v∈Vwith a probability of 1/n. Thedegreenode distribution endows each node
with a mass proportional to its number of neighbors, computed by normalizing the sum
of neighbors for every v∈V. Theadjacency formulation of wGis binary depending on
the existence of an edge between two nodes, akin to the adjacency matrix. If such a path
exists, the shortest path formulation places wG(u, v)as the shortest path from node uto
node v, and a large bounded real-value Botherwise. We will discuss their trade-offs and
interpretation in the context of the GW distance below.
22.2 Discrete Network Gromov-Wasserstein Distance
Given two measure networks MG1= (pG1, wG1)andMG2= (pG2, wG2)with n1andn2
nodes respectively, we define the discrete p-network Gromov-Wasserstein distance as
dN,p(G1, G2) := min
T∈Rn1×n2
≥0,
T1=pG1,
T⊤1=pG2

X
u,u′∈V1X
v,v′∈V2|wG1(u, u′)−wG2(v, v′)|pTu,vTu′,v′

(1)
where T∈Rn1×n2
≥0is a transport matrix between MG1andMG2, i.e., Tis a non-negative
real-valued matrix satisfying the constraints T1=pG1andT⊤1=pG2where 1is a vector of
all 1’s of appropriate dimension. Our formulation is a discretized distance variant proposed
in Chowdhury and Mémoli (2019). In Eq. 1, we overload the notation by using Tu,vto
represent the mass transported from node uin graph G1to node vin graph G2as opposed to
using their indices for ease of interpretation. For simplicity of exposition, we set dgw:=dN,p
with p= 1in the rest of this paper. The distance dgwquantifies the minimal work required
for mass transfer between nodes of two graphs. Notably, the “work required” measures
obstruction to relational structures (defined by wG), weighted by the importance of the
involved nodes (governed by pG). We refer the audience to (Chowdhury and Mémoli, 2019)
for extended discussions on the theoretical properties of the dgwpseudometric.
In the ecological context, entry (u, v)ofTsignals the correspondence between species uandv.
Upon close examination of the GW distance formulation, one can observe that the node mass
pG(v)dictates the priority of aligning node vwell with respect to the graph topology captured
bywG(v). The choice of the node distribution pGthen comes down to a preferred measure
of species importance. With the uniform formulation, we do not differentiate between any
species. With the degreeformulation, we identify species importance through their relative
interactions with respect to other species. The choice of edge weight function wGgoverns
the topological information to preserve, with adjacency formulation accounting for only
direct predator-prey interactions and shortest path capturing relationships across hierarchies.
In practice, the shortest path configuration is more computationally intensive than the
adjacency, as ecological networks are usually directed and not strongly connected. On the
contrary, if a higher-order relationship amongst species is of key interest, we recommend the
shortest path configuration. Next, we will present empirical evidence for the applicability of
the GW distance on synthetic graphs and real-world ecological networks.
3 Numerical Analysis on Food Webs
Figure 2: GW barycenters of
support graphs depicted in the
corner. The center graph is
a barycenter of all supports,
whereas the outer rim graphs
are barycenters of their neigh-
boring support graphs.We demonstrate the ability of GW distance to capture well-
defined topological structures. Our method can uncover rela-
tionships consistent with auxiliary ecological features through
graph topology alone with experiments on complex, real-world
ecological networks.
We perform our experiments in Python, using the NetworkX
library by Hagberg et al. (2008) for generating graphs and
the Python Optimal Transport ( POT) library by Flamary et al.
(2021) for computing dgwand transport plans. Computing the
dgwefficiently per Eq. 1 requires solving a difficult non-convex
optimization problem beyond the scope of our project. All
computations of dgwin this work utilize the widely available
solver ot.gromov.gromov_wasserstein inPOT.
3.1 OT Plan, Barycenter, and MDS over Synthetic Graphs
We show both (1) the geometric interpretability of GW-based graph dissimilarity analysis
and (2) empirical evidence that the GW distance differentiates families of synthetic networks.
3We begin by evaluating the optimal transport (OT) plan for dgwon simple graph models
according to Eq. 1. The OT plan between 25-node and 50-node path graphs in Fig. 7 suggests
a geometrically intuitive stretching transportation under the network GW distance when
moving from the shorter path graph to a longer one. For cycle graphs, the OT plan in Fig. 7
shows that the mass of each node is equally and sequentially distributed to a half-ring since
every node shares identical relationships with its neighbors.
Figure 3: MDS of syn-
thetic block graphs under
dgw. Size is scaled by the
number of nodes.Moving from pairwise graphs {G1, G2}to a set of graphs {Gi}, we
extend the notion of Fréchet mean to the graph space via the GW
barycenter (Peyré et al., 2016). In our experiment, we generate 4
well-known graphs (complete, cycle, star, and path), configuring
them with uniform pGand adjacency wG. Fig. 2 showcases the 10-
node reconstructed barycenter graphs with the 4 simple graphs as
their"supportgraphs"computedwiththeGWbarycenteralgorithm
proposed in (Peyré et al., 2016) in the POT library. See Appendix
A.3 for details.
Next, we show that the Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) embed-
dings (Torgerson, 1952) of GW distance can separate graphs into
different clusters consistent with their topological structure. We
begin with cycle, path, and star graphs with 5 nodes. We then
randomly sample 100 block sizes from 5 to 70, replacing each node
in the original graphs with a fully connected block (see Fig. 8 for 4-block variants). We
generated 100 networks of each family with different sizes and computed their pairwise dgw
with uniform pGand shortest path wG. Using these pairwise distances, we generate 2-D
MDS embeddings for the graphs using the Scikit-Learn library (Pedregosa et al., 2011).
In Fig. 10, this unsupervised approach, supported by the dgw, perfectly generates clusters
corresponding to the graph families.
3.2 Interpreting OT plan among Sub-Saharan food webs
Figure 4: Optimal transport plan between
mammal communities at Pama and Singou
in Sub-Saharan Africa. Green highlights de-
notemasstransportedbetweensharedspecies.
Blue highlights surprising basal species map-
pings.Our group constructed a dataset of 170 mam-
mal food webs across Sub-Saharan Africa by ex-
tracting species-to-network mapping from mam-
mal community composition data compiled
by (Rowan et al., 2020) and predator-prey species
interactionsdocumentedby(Kingdon,2013). See
Appendix A.1 for details on the dataset. We rep-
resenttheecologicalnetworksasadirectedgraph,
extract the largest weakly connected component,
and configure their corresponding network mea-
sure using the uniform node distribution and
shortest path edge weight function. The former
is chosen since we assume no prior information
on species importance, and the latter is used to
capture higher-order relationships among food
webs.
From the 170 mammal food webs, we show the
OT plan between the two closest networks with
respect to the GW distance in Fig. 4. Overall,
we found that OT plans worked very well for
mapping large-bodied predator species to them-
selves when a species was found in both food
webs. For example, this transport successfully
mapped shared predator species between the two webs including lion ( Panthera leo ), leopard
(Panthera pardus ), cheetah ( Acinonyx jubatus ), etc. In some cases, the OT plans identified
functionally equivalent but taxonomically different species such as caracal ( Caracal caracal )
for African wild dog ( Lycaon pictus ) in A.5.
4Our OT plan produces surprising alignment among basal species, i.e., mammals that do not
eat other mammals. For instance, it maps patas monkey ( Erythrocebus patus ) to spotted-
necked otter ( Hydrictis maculicollis ), and warthog ( Phacochoerus africanus ) to aardvark
(Orycteropus afer )). This limitation is an artifact of employing the shortest path distance
since the shortest path from the leaf nodes to any other nodes is some large scalar B(1000
in our case).
Figure 5: OT plans for the top-3 most similar networks across different biome types under dgw. For
detailed listing, refer to Table 1. Observe that many species are aligned to themselves across food
webs as indicated in our analyses for Fig. 4.
Examining the nine most similar food webs under the dgw(listed in Table 1) reveals that
the list is dominated with webs from the tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and
shrublands biome. Fig. 5 demonstrates the top-9 OT plans outside of this biome. Detailed
analyses of the top-9 most similar webs can be found in Appendix A.5. Further analyses of
food webs across different environmental conditions are available in Appendix A.6 and A.7.
4 Conclusions and Future Work
We propose the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance as a novel comparison method between
ecological networks. One primary advantage of this distance relative to existing graph
distances is the optimal transport matrix, which can provide insights into how parts of two
network may be similar or dissimilar to one another. Our continuing work hope to further
exploit this desirable property:
1. Uncertain species interactions: Ecological networks often have uncertain interactions,
producing directed graphs with edge weights in the [0,1]range. The GW distance formulation
can be extended to such settings naturally by defining the node distribution pG(v)of a node
v∈Gas the sum of its edge weights, then normalized to satisfy the definition of pG. In this
setting, species with uncertain interaction will contribute less to the GW objective penalty,
thereby reducing their impact on the GW distance.
2. Connecting species functional traits to topology: The use of functional traits (such
as body mass and diet) to cluster species is widely adapted in ecology. Often, ecologists are
interested in how these functional traits affect the composition of a food web. One natural
approach is to compute correlations between the optimal transport plan and functional
attribute dissimilarity matrix, thereby quantifying the consistency of select functional
attributes between species and their soft matching under the GW distance. Furthermore,
one could directly introduce functional attributes into the graph comparison via the Fused
Gromov-Wasserstein distance proposed by Vayer et al. (2020).
Perhaps most exciting is the use of Gromov-Wasserstein distance as the ground metric for
many classical learning algorithms, enabling a new suite of data-driven methods for studying
ecological networks.
5 Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation Grant No. 2213568.
5References
J. H. Brown, O. Reichman, and D. W. Davidson. Granivory in desert ecosystems. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics , 10(1):201–227, 1979.
N. P. Chacoff, D. P. Vázquez, S. B. Lomáscolo, E. L. Stevani, J. Dorado, and B. Padrón.
Evaluating sampling completeness in a desert plant–pollinator network. Journal of Animal
Ecology, 81(1):190–200, 2012.
S. Chowdhury and F. Mémoli. The gromov–wasserstein distance between networks and
stable network invariants. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA , 8(4):757–787,
2019.
S. Chowdhury and T. Needham. Generalized spectral clustering via gromov-wasserstein
learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages
712–720. PMLR, 2021.
J. A. Estes, J. Terborgh, J. S. Brashares, M. E. Power, J. Berger, W. J. Bond, S. R. Carpenter,
T. E. Essington, R. D. Holt, J. B. Jackson, et al. Trophic downgrading of planet earth.
science, 333(6040):301–306, 2011.
R. Flamary, N. Courty, A. Gramfort, M. Z. Alaya, A. Boisbunon, S. Chambon, L. Chapel,
A. Corenflos, K. Fatras, N. Fournier, L. Gautheron, N. T. Gayraud, H. Janati, A. Rako-
tomamonjy, I. Redko, A. Rolet, A. Schutz, V. Seguy, D. J. Sutherland, R. Tavenard,
A. Tong, and T. Vayer. Pot: Python optimal transport. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 22(78):1–8, 2021.
R. Gera, L. Alonso, B. Crawford, J. House, J. Mendez-Bermudez, T. Knuth, and R. Miller.
Identifying network structure similarity using spectral graph theory. Applied network
science, 3:1–15, 2018.
S. Ghosh, N. Das, T. Gonçalves, P. Quaresma, and M. Kundu. The journey of graph kernels
through two decades. Computer Science Review , 27:88–111, 2018.
A. Hagberg, P. Swart, and D. S Chult. Exploring network structure, dynamics, and function
using networkx. Technical report, Los Alamos National Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM
(United States), 2008.
J. Kingdon. Mammals of Africa . Bloomsbury London, 2013.
H. Kreft and W. Jetz. A framework for delineating biogeographical regions based on species
distributions. Journal of Biogeography , 37(11):2029–2053, 2010.
P. Landi, H. O. Minoarivelo, Å. Brännström, C. Hui, and U. Dieckmann. Complexity and
stability of ecological networks: a review of the theory. Population Ecology , 60:319–345,
2018.
N. Liu, Q. Feng, and X. Hu. Interpretability in graph neural networks. Graph Neural
Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications , pages 121–147, 2022.
J. Looman and J. Campbell. Adaptation of sorensen’s k (1948) for estimating unit affinities
in prairie vegetation. Ecology, 41(3):409–416, 1960.
F. Mémoli. Gromov–wasserstein distances and the metric approach to object matching.
Foundations of computational mathematics , 11:417–487, 2011.
C. Parmesan. Ecological and evolutionary responses to recent climate change. Annu. Rev.
Ecol. Evol. Syst. , 37:637–669, 2006.
M. Pascual and J. A. Dunne. Ecological networks: linking structure to dynamics in food
webs. Oxford University Press, 2006.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python.
the Journal of machine Learning research , 12:2825–2830, 2011.
6L. Pellissier, C. Albouy, J. Bascompte, N. Farwig, C. Graham, M. Loreau, M. A. Maglianesi,
C. J. Melián, C. Pitteloud, T. Roslin, et al. Comparing species interaction networks along
environmental gradients. Biological Reviews , 93(2):785–800, 2018.
G. Peyré, M. Cuturi, and J. Solomon. Gromov-wasserstein averaging of kernel and distance
matrices. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2664–2672. PMLR, 2016.
G. Peyré, M. Cuturi, et al. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
science.Foundations and Trends ®in Machine Learning , 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
T. Poisot, D. B. Stouffer, and S. Kéfi. Describe, understand and predict. Functional Ecology ,
30(12):1878–1882, 2016.
J. Rowan, L. Beaudrot, J. Franklin, K. E. Reed, I. E. Smail, A. Zamora, and J. M. Kamilar.
Geographically divergent evolutionary and ecological legacies shape mammal biodiversity
in the global tropics and subtropics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117
(3):1559–1565, 2020.
A. Sarajlić, N. Malod-Dognin, Ö. N. Yaveroğlu, and N. Pržulj. Graphlet-based characteriza-
tion of directed networks. Scientific reports , 6(1):35098, 2016.
M. Tantardini, F. Ieva, L. Tajoli, and C. Piccardi. Comparing methods for comparing
networks. Scientific reports , 9(1):17557, 2019.
W. S. Torgerson. Multidimensional scaling: I. theory and method. Psychometrika , 17(4):
401–419, 1952.
D. Tuia, B. Kellenberger, S. Beery, B. R. Costelloe, S. Zuffi, B. Risse, A. Mathis, M. W.
Mathis, F. van Langevelde, T. Burghardt, et al. Perspectives in machine learning for
wildlife conservation. Nature communications , 13(1):792, 2022.
J. M. Tylianakis and R. J. Morris. Ecological networks across environmental gradients.
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics , 48:25–48, 2017.
T. Vayer, L. Chapel, R. Flamary, R. Tavenard, and N. Courty. Fused gromov-wasserstein
distance for structured objects. Algorithms , 13(9):212, 2020.
J. W. Williams and S. T. Jackson. Novel climates, no-analog communities, and ecological
surprises. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 5(9):475–482, 2007.
R. C. Wilson and P. Zhu. A study of graph spectra for comparing graphs and trees. Pattern
Recognition , 41(9):2833–2841, 2008.
H. Xu. Gromov-wasserstein factorization models for graph clustering. In Proceedings of the
AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages 6478–6485, 2020.
H. Xu, D. Luo, and L. Carin. Scalable gromov-wasserstein learning for graph partitioning
and matching. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019.
H.Xu, J.Liu, D.Luo, andL.Carin. Representinggraphsviagromov-wassersteinfactorization.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 45(1):999–1016, 2022.
7A Appendix
A.1 Dataset description
Our dataset comprises mammal food webs from 170 protected regions across Sub-Saharan
Africa. In particular, we leverage published terrestrial community composition data
from (Rowan et al., 2020), which contains 258 mammal species from 12 orders and 33
families. The mammal community data were collected from field surveys, species lists, and
databases and then cross-referenced with International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) Red List range maps and standardized to IUCN Red List taxonomy. The commu-
nities contain only mammals weighing ≥500 grams because data for small taxa are far
less available and less reliable. To construct the food webs from mammal communities, we
utilize the common meta-web approach (Pascual and Dunne, 2006) for large-scale spatial
studies. In particular, we establish connections between species based on predator-prey
species interaction documented in (Kingdon, 2013). Fig. 1 visualizes the mammal food webs
over the African continent, with labels corresponding to biome categories. Fig. 6 contains
kernel density estimations of the node, edge, and aggregated degree distribution across all
170 constructed food webs.
Figure 6: The kernel density estimation plots of graph-level statistics across the 170 mammal
communities in 1. (Left) Node per graph distribution. (Center) Edge per graph distribution. (Right)
Degree per node distribution across all graphs.
8A.2 Path and cycle optimal transport plans
For this experiment, we used the NetworkX library in Python to generate path and cycle
graphs with 25 and 50 nodes respectively. Then, we configure them into measure networks
using the uniform and shortest path settings. In Fig. 7, we visualize the optimal transport
plan between the respective graphs of the same class, yet with varying sizes.
Figure 7: OT plans for dgwcomputation between 25-node and 50-node path graphs (left) and
cycle graphs (right). The axes are node IDs. Nodes in the path graph are labeled from end-to-end,
whereas the cycle graph is labeled consecutively starting with an arbitrary node.
9A.3 Block graphs
For this experiment, we compute the dgwbetween base graphs and n-block graphs for n= 4
across the star, path, and cycle families. The construction of an n-block graph is formed
by replacing each node in the base graph with nfully connected nodes, while forming the
original connections using the first and last added nodes.
Figure 8: A comparison of star, path, and cycle graphs (top) with their corresponding block graphs
with a block size of 4 (middle). The optimal transport plans show that the nodes in the base graphs
are transported to their corresponding blocks in the block graphs (bottom).
10A.4 Graph reconstruction from GW barycenters
Using the Python Optimal Transport (POT) library, we can compute the GW barycenter
using the algorithm proposed in (Peyré et al., 2016). Given a list of Ngraphs (Gi)N
i=1,
we first configure them into their corresponding measure networks (MGi)N
i=1. We also
specify a weight vector λ= (λi)n
i=1such that λ∈∆(N)where∆(N)is the probability
simplex of dimension N. Along with a specified dimension nb, we can compute the GW
barycenter B∈Rnb×nbusing the ot.gromov.gromov_barycenters function in POT. Under
these configurations, one can interpret Bas the wG′for a new graph G′.
In the case that (MGi)N
i=1is configured with a adjacency edge weight, the GW barycenter
can be interpreted as an adjacency matrix. However, Bcontains values in the Rspace, and
we must first map it into binary, i.e., all entries are either 0 (no edge) or 1 (has an edge) to
convert this barycenter into a proper adjacency matrix. In this work, we set thresholds to
produce graphs as seen in Fig. 2. Our work leaves room for future explorations into graph
reconstruction from GW barycenters.
A.5 Most similar food webs by dgw
Beyond examining the two most similar food webs under the dgw, we also present the top-9
most similar networks in Table 1. From this table, we observe that many of the most similar
communities are from the tropical and subtropical grasslands and savannas biome. We also
observe 3 pairs of communities from different biomes and present their OT plan in Fig. 5.
Site 1 Site 2 dgw
Pama Singou 1414.01
Singou Tamou 1414.02
Pama Tamou 1886.60
Air and Tenere Ouadi Rime Ouadi Achim 1886.60
Mana Pools Vwaza Marsh 2595.25
Lolldaiga Mago 2772.26
Banhine Mudumu 2865.89
Mudumu Okavango Delta 3726.56
Kourtiagou Madjoari 3773.17
Table 1: Top 9 most similar food webs under dgwwith uniform and shortest path configuration. All
regions are from the tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome with the
exception of Air and Tenere, Lolldaiga, Vwaza Marsh, and Okavango Delta. In particular, Air and
Tenere is from the desert biome; Lolldaiga is from the tropical moist broadleaf forest, Vwaza Marsh
from montane grasslands and savannas; and Okavango Delta is from the flooded grasslands and
savannas biome.
11A.6 Pairwise dgwamong sub-saharan mammal food webs
Figure 9: Heatmap of pairwise dgwordered by cluster groups
obtained from Sorensen-Dice coefficient, a measure of species
similarity between sites.In this section, we show the pair-
wise dgwheatmap with rows and
columns grouped by clusters com-
puted using the Sorensen-Dice co-
efficient on species similarity be-
tween sites as in (Looman and
Campbell, 1960).
SD(G1, G2) :=2|V1∩V2|
|V1|+|V2|(2)
The Sorensen-Dice coefficient be-
tween graphs G1andG2is a mea-
sure of shared species, i.e. the node
setsV1andV2. The clusters are
then obtained using the recluster
package in R, which creates consen-
sus trees in a resampling approach.
Specifically, we used the func-
tion recluster.multi and the un-
weighted pair group method with
arithmetic mean (UPMGA) and
1000 bootstrap iterations. UP-
MGA has been shown to work well
across taxonomic groups in (Kreft
and Jetz, 2010). We examined our clusters created with 94% of dissimilarity explained and
adjusted according to the following guidelines 1) Clusters could not be nested within each
other. 2) Sites unassigned to a cluster were assigned to the closest geographic cluster. 3)
Sites that did not satisfy above conditions were excluded (N=2).
In Fig. 9, we identify lightened blocks on the heatmap diagonals. This indicates partial
correspondence between food web topology captured by the dgwand shared species presence.
For instance, a bright region in the middle corresponds to the dgwdistance between Abijata-
Shalla, Parc W Niger, and Yangudi Rassa National Parks. These are all sites of the savanna
and grassland regions. On the contrary, a set of mammal communities vastly differs from
others (indicated by the dark blue shaded "cross" in the middle of the heatmap). Sites
in this region includes the Banc d’Arguin and Lac Fitri national parks, which are coastal
land and landmass within a freshwater lake respectively. Our heatmap suggests that the
topological structure of food webs, given species similarity, are more consistent for regions
with diverse species than those with less. This is consistent with the ecological understanding
that removal of species from a species-rich biome typically inflict less impact due to functional
redundancy than those with fewer species.
Figure 10: Multi-dimensional scaling vi-
sualization of pairwise dgwlabeled by
biome types.Next, we utilized MDS to visualize the 170 mammal
foods in 2-D space. We observe no obvious clusters
from our MDS visualization of the mammal food web
pairwise dgwin Fig. 10. However, we notice that al-
most all communities in the tropical and subtropical
moist broadleaf forests are clustered together. On the
contrary, desert biome graphs are scattered around
the outskirts of the produced cluster. This is consis-
tent with the observed uniqueness of the desert biome
induced by the scarcity of resources (Brown et al.,
1979; Chacoff et al., 2012). It also suggests that the
topological structure between food webs of regions
with diverse species may be more alike, whereas those
with lower species varieties tend to vary more.
12A.7 Gromov-Wasserstein Barycenter & Graph Factorization
Figure 11: Barycenter per biome visualized in 3D
space. EachpointrepresentstheGWbarycenterof
abiome, withthetransparencyofanedgedenoting
thedgwbetween two barycenters (lighter is closer).Beyond analysis of pairwise dgw, we com-
puted the GW barycenter of mammal com-
munities per biome type shown in Fig. 11.
In this plot, we observe that the barycen-
ter of tropical and subtropical grasslands,
savannas, and shrublands lie in the center
and dominates the positions of the other
biome barycenters. This is consistent with
the relatively large sample of mammal com-
munities of this biome type in our dataset
and their scattered positioning in Fig. 10
and Fig. 12 respectively. Furthermore, this
plot shows that the desert biome barycenter
is positioned farthest away from the other
tropical biomes. We omit the tropical and
subtropical dry broadleaf forest in this anal-
ysis since there are very few food webs of
this type present in our dataset, resulting in
a non-informative barycenter.
Figure 12: (Top) T-SNE visualization of GWF
embeddings labeled by biome type. (Bottom) Top-
4 significant graph atoms.Lastly, we apply the GW factorization
(GWF) algorithm from (Xu et al., 2022)
on our measure networks with the num-
ber of graph atoms set to 80 and the size
of the atom generated uniformly over the
range of the node distribution from the
food webs themselves. In addition to the
graph atoms, the algorithm also learns an
80-dimensional embedding for every ecolog-
ical network, corresponding to their weight
to each of the 80 graph atoms. In Fig. 12, we
plot the first 2 components TSNE learned
from the atom weight embeddings with sam-
pled graph atoms across the ecological net-
works.
13