From Spectra to Biophysical Insights: End-to-End Learning with 
a Biased Radiative Transfer Model 
Yihang She 1, Clement Atzberger 2, Andrew Blake 1, 2 and Srinivasan Keshav 1
1 University of Cambridge, 2 Mantle Labs 
❖End-to-end learning with a complex RTM. 
❖Plausible recovery of variables with bias correction. 
❖Implications for inverting biased physical models. 1.Biophysical Representations of Forests 
4. Conclusion 
Contact: ys611@cam.ac.uk INFORM — a forest RTM — and its variables to learn. 2. End-to-End Learning of the Inverse 
Sentinel-2 data to use.  Species and temporal information 
will be used to verify retrieved variables’ plausibility .  
End-to-end pipeline to invert the RTM 
❖Integrating INFORM into an auto-encoder structure 
❖Bias correction function 
❖Making a fully differentiable INFORM assisted by GPT-4 
3. Results 
3. Results 
AE_RTM_corr achieves over ten times lower  MSE than the baseline NNRegressor. 
Superior reconstruction accuracy for AE_RTM_corr, illustrated by spectral band. 
Baseline application to real spectra yields implausible distributions of variables, while 
AE_RTM_corr learns  plausible and distinguishable distributions across forest types. 
Pairwise co-distributions of variables shows that AE_RTM_corr can learn distinct 
physical patterns . Red: coniferous forest. Blue: deciduous forest. 
Our model effectively captures distinct, temporally smooth and plausible 
variations  of inferred physical parameters for different forest types.  
Pairwise Jeffreys-Matusita (JM) distance between species based on the learned 
variables.  Our model can learn more disentangled variables  within the latent space. Bias correction . Significantly improved reconstruction loss. 
Biophysical variables . More plausible recovery. 
Acknowledgement : This work was supported by the UKRI Centre for Doctoral Training in Application of Artificial 
Intelligence to the study of Environmental Risks (reference EP/S022961/1) and Cambridge Centre for Carbon Credits. 
We would also like to thank Markus Immitzer from Mantle Labs for sharing the Sentinel-2 data with us. Scan the QR code 
to learn more 
Wavelength (nm) Reflectance  (%) 
Radiative Transfer Model (RTM) 
Learning the inverse? 
Rendering 
Inference 
Challenges to invert the RTM  
❖Not uniquely invertible 
❖Systematic biases in simulated spectra 
❖Numerical model differentiability 
State-of-the-Art : regressive neural network 
Our Approach:  learning the inverse with an auto-encoder Differentiable Rendering 
Can this concept be generalized to 
retrieve biophysical variables of 
forests? 
Our model (AE_RTM_corr) can do end-to-end learning of the inverse. Regressive 
neural network — a classical approach — serves as a baseline  (NNRegressor). 
(a) NNRegressor (b) AE_RTM_corr 
(a) NNRegressor 
(b) AE_RTM_corr 