On the Role of Spatial Clustering Algorithms in
Building Species Distribution Models from Community Science Data
Mark Roth1Tyler Hallman2 3W. Douglas Robinson2Rebecca A. Hutchinson1 2
Abstract
This paper discusses opportunities for develop-
ments in spatial clustering methods to help lever-
age broad scale community science data for build-
ing species distribution models (SDMs). SDMs
are tools that inform the science and policy needed
to mitigate the impacts of climate change on bio-
diversity. Community science data span spatial
and temporal scales unachievable by expert sur-
veys alone, but they lack the structure imposed in
smaller scale studies to allow adjustments for ob-
servational biases. Spatial clustering approaches
can construct the necessary structure after surveys
have occurred, but more work is needed to ensure
that they are effective for this purpose. In this
proposal, we describe the role of spatial cluster-
ing for realizing the potential of large biodiver-
sity datasets, how existing methods approach this
problem, and ideas for future work.
1. Introduction
Species distribution models (SDMs) are critical tools for
mitigating the impact of climate change on biodiversity.
SDMs link environmental variables to species observations
to infer key characteristics of habitat requirements and to
predict where species can persist. As ecosystems change,
scientists and natural resource managers rely on SDMs to
inform conservation policy decisions like designing reserves
for threatened species and to predict how species will react
to global change. Our ability to effectively protect species
against extinction relies on high-quality SDMs. This tool
can be built from a variety of biodiversity datasets, but
community science programs like eBird and iNaturalist are
growing in size, quality, and importance. A strength of these
1Department of Electrical Engineering Computer Science, Ore-
gon State University, USA2Department of Fisheries, Wildlife,
Conservation Sciences, Oregon State University, USA3Swiss Or-
nithological Institute, Sempach, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Mark Roth <rothmark@oregonstate.edu >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).programs is that they welcome contributions from a diverse
population of wildlife observers with varying experience.
These crowdsourced datasets present exciting opportunities
to understand the Earth’s changing ecosystems at scales
previously unattainable, but further methodological research
is needed to fully leverage their potential. In this proposal,
we outline the role that spatial clustering algorithms can play
in improving SDMs built with community science data.
Community science data are impacted by imperfect detec-
tion: the common phenomenon in which observers do not
detect all individuals and/or species present during a survey.
Even expert observers encounter this issue—sometimes,
birds are silent and hidden, for example—but community
scientists with less training are even more impacted. Im-
perfect detection functions as class conditional noise in the
view of SDMs as a classiﬁcation problem, where positive
examples have little to no noise and negative examples may
reﬂect substantial corruption (Hutchinson et al., 2017). To
account for imperfect detection, studies conducted by ex-
perts use a careful sampling design that allows them to
simultaneously estimate the probability that a species occu-
pies a location and the probability that the observer detects
the species given that it is present. This methodology is
referred to as occupancy modeling , and it has become the
dominant approach in statistical ecology for correcting the
effects of imperfect detection (MacKenzie et al., 2002; Bai-
ley et al., 2014). Ignoring imperfect detection can lead to
biased estimates of species distributions, so occupancy mod-
els are a necessary tool for drawing accurate conclusions
from biodiversity data (Guillera-Arroita et al., 2014; Lahoz-
Monfort et al., 2014). Our focal problem in this paper is the
fact that community science data are not collected accord-
ing to the sampling design prescribed by occupancy models.
Instead, contributors report observations at the times and
places of their choosing.
We present the ﬁrst attempt to frame the challenge of cre-
ating sites for occupancy models from unstructured com-
munity science data as a spatial clustering problem, which
we introduce as the Site Clustering Problem . Below, we
examine existing methods that at least partially address the
problem and explore some spatial clustering approaches to
solve it in a case study. We illustrate where this researchSpatial Clustering for SDMs
Figure 1. The proposed Site Clustering Problem (in red) lies on
the critical path to informing action on biodiversity conservation.
lies on the critical path that begins at data collection and
ends with climate change mitigation (Figure 1). Improved
solutions to this problem will produce more accurate mod-
els and have direct impacts to biodiversity conservation and
natural resource planning.
2. Background
Occupancy models rely on a few key assumptions to cor-
rect for imperfect detection. They expect that data consist
of multiple observations collected at each of a set of sites.
Theclosure assumption states that the occupancy status of
the species remains constant across the observations at a
site. For example, a site could be a section of a state park
surveyed along three different transects, and the occupancy
model would assume that the entire section (site) was either
occupied or unoccupied, even if the observations from the
transects vary. Classic occupancy models also assume no
false positives ; that is, observers may miss the species, but
positive reports are reliable. These assumptions in tandem
allow the probability of detection to be estimated. In our
example, if the three observations were [0;1;0], it is implied
that this site is occupied, and the detection probability is1
3.
This is just the intuition—in the statistical model, many sites
and repeated observations are aggregated and the probabili-
ties are linked to covariates (habitat features for occupancy
probabilities and survey features for detection probabilities).
Scientists planning to use occupancy models design surveys
with repeated observations over which closure can reason-
ably be assumed, but community scientists do not have this
structure imposed upon their contributions in advance.
As a case study, we focus on the eBird community science
program. eBird, which has over one billion birding obser-vations across the globe, provides researchers with the data
necessary to construct avian species models at vast spatial
and temporal scales (Sullivan et al., 2014). eBirders report
checklists of how many of each species they observed, and
they indicate whether they are reporting everything they saw,
in which case absences can be inferred for all other species.
3. Problem Statement and Related Work
We introduce the Site Clustering Problem for grouping a
set of geospatial wildlife surveys into sites for occupancy
modeling. Our objective is to create sites that satisfy the clo-
sure assumption for occupancy modeling. This is challeng-
ing because closure does not have a mathematical deﬁnition
amenable to direct optimization, and because it will vary
across species and regions. We expect that successful solu-
tions to this problem will: 1) discover the optimal number
of clusters automatically, 2) respect geospatial constraints
imposed by species behavior 3) consider similarity in en-
vironmental feature space, and 4) run efﬁciently on large
datasets.
The initial state of our case study begins with each eBird
checklist as an independent birding observation that has as-
sociated spatial coordinates and environmental features. In
existing literature, there are two main approaches to prepar-
ing community science data for occupancy modeling. John-
ston et al. (2019) suggested best practices for analyzing
eBird data, including deﬁning a site as a set of two to ten
checklists submitted by the same observer at the same ex-
act latitude-longitude coordinates. While this deﬁnition is
conducive to assuming closure, it reduces the number of
visits per site, which occupancy models need for identifying
occupancy and detection parameters. Consider the scenario
in which an observer conducts consecutive birding surveys
at two adjacent, nearby locations in the same habitat. Since
the coordinates are not identical, these two checklists would
be considered independent observations of two distinct sites
instead of leveraging them as replicate observations. Fur-
thermore, this method discards all sites with only a single
visit, which can reliably estimate site occupancy (Lele et al.,
2012). In our preliminary study, this deﬁnition of a site
retains less than 25% of available checklists . A second
approach places a grid over the study region. All surveys
within the same grid are considered repeated observations
of the same site. A common choice of resolution is 1 km2
(Dennis et al., 2017; vanStrien et al., 2013). Because this
approach ignores the spatial and environmental information,
checklists in two different habitats can be grouped into the
same site, which is likely to violate the closure assumption.
A variety of existing spatial clustering algorithms (reviewed
further by Liu et al. (2012)) might be applied to the Site
Clustering Problem, but none clearly meet all the success
criteria laid out above. Partitioning methods, such as spatialSpatial Clustering for SDMs
ARI AMI NID occ MSE
ground truth 1.0 1.0 0 .0389 .015
eBird-BP - - - .1177.041
1-kmSq .9948 .9401 .0599 .1065.027
lat-long .9992 .9825 .0175 .0422 .017
rounded-4 .9992 .9826 .0174 .0424 .017
density-based .9806 .9566 .0434 .1193 .031
clustGeo .9994 .9909 .0091 .0460 .019
CC-agglom .9992 .9835 .0166 .0421 .017
CC-balls .9992 .9834 .0165 .0422 .017
Table 1. Several off-the-shelf algorithms and simple heuristics outperform existing practices (red) in terms of similarity (ARI, AMI, NID)
and parameter estimation (occ MSE). Higher values of ARI and AMI and lower values of NID and occ MSE indicate better performance.
k-means, and CLARANS (Ng & Han, 2002), require a
user-deﬁned number of clusters. Density-based approaches,
such as DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996), and regionalization
algorithms, such as SKATER (Assun c ¸˜ao et al., 2006) and
REDCAP (Guo, 2008), are guided by the density of points,
but closure is independent of density (i.e., clusters may be
very close in space).
4. Preliminary Experiments
We simulated a case study inspired by 2,146 eBird check-
lists from the southwestern quadrant of Oregon, USA col-
lected between May and July 2017. Since occupancy is
a latent variable at each site, we used simulated data in
order to examine the impact of different site clusterings
with access to ground truth. To create it, we constructed
ecologically defensible sites by manually examining the en-
vironmental and spatial proximity of eBird checklists. Then
we simulated species data at these sites from an occupancy
model, which produced present/absent values for each site
and detection/non-detection values for every checklist.
We examined a range of spatial clustering algorithms and
baselines and compared the following approaches:
•eBird-BP : groups checklists with identical coordinates
and observers; 2-10 visits per site (Johnston et al., 2019)
•1-kmSq : groups checklists falling within the same cell of
a grid of 1 km2squares
•lat-long : groups checklists with identical coordinates,
any number of visits per site are allowed
•rounded-4 : groups checklists with the same coordinates,
rounded to the 4thdecimal place
•density-based : (i.e., Density Based Spatial Clustering)
groups checklists by considering each checklist’s spatial
neighbors and the similarity in environmental feature space
(Liu et al., 2012)
•clustGeo : a hierarchical agglomerative clustering method
(Chavent et al., 2018)In addition, we implemented two consensus cluster-
ing solutions, CC-balls andCC-agglom (Gionis et al.,
2007). Consensus clustering (or ensemble clustering)
combines the clusters of multiple clustering algorithms
into a single result (Vega-Pons & Ruiz-Shulcloper, 2011).
This is a promising method for our domain because a
combination of algorithms with different spatial constraints
may better approximate a spatial requirement that is not
well-deﬁned (closure). In both CC-balls andCC-agglom ,
the inputs were lat-long ,rounded-4 , and density-based .
We considered two strategies for evaluating these algorithms.
First, we asked whether the sites returned by the clustering
algorithms accurately reﬂected the ground truth assignments.
We measured Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), Adjusted Mutual
Information (AMI), and Normalized Information Distance
(NID) to assess this (Vinh et al., 2010). These metrics
serve as a proxy for a measurement of closure because we
can assume closure holds for our ground-truth clustering.
Second, we asked whether the site assignments produced
differences in the ability of the occupancy model to estimate
the ground truth parameters. To this end, we measured
the average mean squared error of the predicted and true
occupancy probabilities across all checklists.
5. Results and Discussion
For all evaluation metrics, the new methods we applied out-
performed the eBird best practice and the common practice
of imposing a grid (Table 1). The improvements exceed two
standard deviations, with the exception of density-based .
Simple solutions (i.e., rounded-4 andlat-long ) and the
off-the-shelf spatial clustering algorithms substantially im-
proved upon existing practices, even though they had impre-
cise deﬁnitions of closure. The similar performance among
these methods suggests room for improvement.
Future work on this project may focus on designing a novel
spatial clustering algorithm to improve on the methods
presented here. A successful algorithm will integrate do-Spatial Clustering for SDMs
main knowledge and we have begun to develop an ecology-
informed distance metric that can be inserted into existing
clustering algorithms. Our novel solution will also take pa-
rameters that allow the user to tune the clustering algorithm
based on constraints imposed by a particular species.
Eventually, we plan to expand this work to spatial-temporal
considerations because the deﬁnition of closure depends on
the distance between observations in both space and time.
In our study, we ﬁxed the temporal period of closure. We
studied observations collected during the breeding season
(between May and July), which is a common time frame
to assume closure. An adept clustering algorithm would
run on observations occurring throughout the entire year
and would construct sites that respect both dimensions of
closure.
Our preliminary work suggests that better solutions to the
Site Clustering Problem for community science datasets
may produce signiﬁcant improvements in SDMs. With
more accurate SDMs, conservationists and land managers
can identify regions of concern with greater precision and
dedicate limited resources to remedy population declines
more effectively.
References
Assun c ¸˜ao, R. M., Neves, M. C., C ˆamara, G., and Freitas,
C. D. C. Efﬁcient regionalization techniques for socio-
economic geographical units using minimum spanning
trees. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science , 20(7):797–811, 2006.
Bailey, L. L., MacKenzie, D. I., and Nichols, J. D. Ad-
vances and applications of occupancy models. Methods
in Ecology and Evolution , 5(12):1269–1279, 2014.
Chavent, M., Kuentz-Simonet, V ., Labenne, A., and Saracco,
J. Clustgeo: an r package for hierarchical clustering
with spatial constraints. Computational Statistics , 33(4):
1799–1822, Jan 2018.
Dennis, E., Morgan, B., Freeman, S., Ridout, M., Brereton,
T., Fox, R., Powney, G., and Roy, D. Efﬁcient occupancy
model-ﬁtting for extensive citizen-science data. 2017.
Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., and Xu, X. A density-
based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial
databases with noise. pp. 226–231, 1996.
Gionis, A., Mannila, H., and Tsaparas, P. Clustering ag-
gregation. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data , 1(1):4–es,
March 2007. ISSN 1556-4681.
Guillera-Arroita, G., Lahoz-Monfort, J., MacKenzie, D. I.,
Wintle, B. A., and McCarthy, M. A. Ignoring imperfect
detection in biological surveys is dangerous: a responseto ’ﬁtting and interpreting occupancy models’. PloS one ,
9(7):e99571–e99571, 07 2014.
Guo, D. Regionalization with dynamically constrained ag-
glomerative clustering and partitioning (redcap). Interna-
tional Journal of Geographical Information Science , 22
(7):801–823, 2008.
Hutchinson, R. A., He, L., and Emerson, S. C. Species
Distribution Modeling of Citizen Science Data as a Clas-
siﬁcation Problem with Class-conditional Noise. In Pro-
ceedings of the 31st Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AAAI 2017) , 2017.
Johnston, A., Hochachka, W., Strimas-Mackey, M., Gutier-
rez, V . R., Robinson, O., Miller, E., Auer, T., Kelling,
S., and Fink, D. Best practices for making reliable infer-
ences from citizen science data: case study using ebird
to estimate species distributions. bioRxiv , 2019. doi:
10.1101/574392.
Lahoz-Monfort, J. J., Guillera-Arroita, G., and Wintle, B. A.
Imperfect detection impacts the performance of species
distribution models. Global Ecology and Biogeography ,
23(4):504–515, 2014.
Lele, S., Moreno, M., and Bayne, E. Dealing with detection
error in site occupancy surveys: what can we do with a
single survey? Journal of Plant Ecology , 5:22–31, 2012.
Liu, Q., Deng, M., Shi, Y ., and Wang, J. A density-based
spatial clustering algorithm considering both spatial prox-
imity and attribute similarity. Computers Geosciences ,
46:296–309, 2012.
MacKenzie, D. I., Nichols, J. D., Lachman, G. B., Droege,
S., Royle, J. A., and Langtimm, C. A. Estimating Site
Occupancy Rates When Detection Probabilities Are Less
Than One. Ecology , 83(8):2248–2255, aug 2002.
Ng, R. and Han, J. Clarans: a method for clustering objects
for spatial data mining. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering , 14(5):1003–1016, 2002.
Sullivan, B. L., Aycrigg, J. L., Barry, J. H., Bonney, R. E.,
Bruns, N., Cooper, C. B., Damoulas, T., Dhondt, A. A.,
Dietterich, T., Farnsworth, A., Fink, D., Fitzpatrick, J. W.,
Fredericks, T., Gerbracht, J., Gomes, C., Hochachka,
W. M., Iliff, M. J., Lagoze, C., La Sorte, F. A., Merriﬁeld,
M., Morris, W., Phillips, T. B., Reynolds, M., Rodewald,
A. D., Rosenberg, K. V ., Trautmann, N. M., Wiggins,
A., Winkler, D. W., Wong, W. K., Wood, C. L., Yu, J.,
and Kelling, S. The eBird enterprise: An integrated ap-
proach to development and application of citizen science.
Biological Conservation , 169:31–40, 2014.Spatial Clustering for SDMs
vanStrien, A., van Swaay, C., and Termaat, T. Opportunistic
citizen science data of animal species produce reliable
estimates of distribution trends if analysed with occu-
pancy models. Journal of Applied Ecology , 50:1450–
1458, 2013.
Vega-Pons, S. and Ruiz-Shulcloper, J. A survey of clustering
ensemble algorithms. International Journal of Pattern
Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 25(03):337–372,
2011.
Vinh, N. X., Epps, J., and Bailey, J. Information theoretic
measures for clusterings comparison: Variants, properties,
normalization and correction for chance. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 11:2837–2854, December 2010. ISSN 1532-4435.