Quantiﬁcation of Carbon Sequestration in Urban Forests
Levente J Klein1Wang Zhou1Conrad M Albrecht1 2
Abstract
Vegetation, trees in particular, sequester carbon
by absorbing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
However, the lack of efﬁcient quantiﬁcation meth-
ods of carbon stored in trees renders it difﬁcult
to track the process. We present an approach
to estimate the carbon storage in trees based on
fusing multi-spectral aerial imagery and LiDAR
data to identify tree coverage, geometric shape,
and tree species—key attributes to carbon storage
quantiﬁcation. We demonstrate that tree species
information and their three-dimensional geomet-
ric shapes can be estimated from aerial imagery
in order to determine the tree’s biomass. Speciﬁ-
cally, we estimate a total of 52;000tons of carbon
sequestered in trees for New York City’s borough
Manhattan.
1. Introduction
Recent environmental reports underline the pressing need
for the elimination of Green House Gases (GHG) from the
atmosphere in order to bring the carbon dioxide level to the
pre-industrial norm (IPCC). Carbon removing techniques
span from scrubbing emission sources, manufacturing car-
bon trapping materials, and sequestering carbon in trees or
soil. One popular idea proposed recently is the afforestation
of 900 billion hectares of land (Bastin et al., 2019), which
has the potential to offset more than 200 megatons of car-
bon from the atmosphere. In the emerging carbon trading
market, companies may purchase forested land to offset
their GHG emission and reduce carbon footprints(L ¨utjens
et al., 2019). There is a need for tools and platforms able
to quantify in near real time and track GHG emissions and
total carbon offsets. Such tools may need to estimate the
total carbon stored in trees or in soil multiple times a year
to support a fair and transparent carbon trading market.
1IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY , USA2German
Aerospace Center (DLR), Weßling, Germany. Correspon-
dence to: Levente Klein <kleinl@us.ibm.com >, Wang Zhou
<wang.zhou@ibm.com >.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning Workshop at
ICML 2021.Currently, carbon sequestration is estimated by a plethora
of proprietary tools and models, making it hard to compare
side by side carbon sequestration models. Carbon storage
estimates typically rely on generic models where shape, den-
sity, and species distribution of trees is surveyed from small
sample plots. Subsequently, ﬁgures on larger geographies
and environments get extrapolated (Sileshi, 2014).
The maximum amount of carbon captured by a tree is pre-
dominantly limited by its geometric size which, in turn,
is bounded by physics such as water transport from roots
to leaves (Koch et al., 2004). Hence, knowledge of tree
coverage, their geometric sizes and species characteristics
is crucial in providing accurate carbon storage estimates.
At the same time the task is technically challenging since
such information is not readily available for the majority of
locations on the planet (Chave et al., 2014).
In this work, we propose to exploit remote sensing data in
order to determine tree coverage, estimate tree’s geometric
shapes & species to ultimately quantify the carbon seques-
tration in those trees at scale. Speciﬁcally, we train machine
learning models to analyze aerial imagery to determine tree
coverage, to classify their species, and to determine the local
allometric relation for each tree species. LiDAR data from
a sample region is utilized to locally calibrate the biomass
estimation model. Model inference does not require LiDAR
data. Hence, the learnt relation may get exploited in regions
with only aerial imagery available. As an illustration, we
generate a high-resolution map of carbon sequestration in
New York City’s urban forest.
2. Related work
Tree allometric estimation. The allometric scaling re-
lates tree height to tree crown diameter, and tree dimensions
to tree biomass. Such correlations are common practice
in forestry research (Chave et al., 2005). Estimates of tree
dimensions is important to infer the total biomass which,
in turn, relates to the carbon stored in trees. The literature
poses the quest to establish a generic scaling law correlat-
ing tree height with tree lateral dimensions (Klein et al.,
2019) to better estimate the above ground biomass (Chave
et al., 2014). Since the scaling relation strongly depends on
tree species and tree age in addition to the locations trees
grow in (urban vs. rural areas), carbon estimate models needQuantiﬁcation of Carbon Sequestration in Urban Forests
Figure 1. Data processing workﬂow to quantify carbon sequestration in trees based on aerial images, LiDAR data, and tree species data.
local calibration based on tree species and geographical
conditions.
Tree species classiﬁcation. Quantiﬁcation of carbon se-
questered in trees is limited by the detailed knowledge of
the tree’s geometrical dimensions and their species. Cur-
rent advances in image processing enable plot-level tree
classiﬁcation including estimates of tree size (Guan et al.,
2015). We propose to generalize the image-based estima-
tion method to identify individual trees, and to classify their
species (Zhou & Klein, 2020) for urban forests exploiting
only aerial imagery accompanied by labeled tree species
data.
Tree total biomass. Estimates of carbon captured in trees
are based on knowing the tree’s volume and its wood density
which, in turn, strongly depends on the tree species. In order
to determine the volume, the tree crown diameter and the
tree height need to be determined along with the tree species.
The above ground biomass (AGB) may get approximated
by (Chave et al., 2005):
AGB =F(D2
4)H; (1)
whereHrepresents tree height, Ddenotes tree canopy di-
ameter,speciﬁes the tree dry mass density, and Fis a
form factor that takes into account the tree’s shape. The
shape factor Ftypically varies in 0:01to1depending on
the trunk’s shape (Chave et al., 2014).
The below ground biomass (BGB) is assumed as 0:3
AGB (Cairns et al., 1997) and the total biomass of a tree is
speciﬁed by the sum of AGB and BGB, i.e. 1:3AGB .3. Method
Our pipeline for quantiﬁcation of carbon sequestration em-
ploy aerial imagery and LiDAR data. Fig. 1 illustrates the
data processing steps and machine learning models applied
in order to determine tree coverage, tree geometric sizes,
and tree species for carbon sequestration estimates. The
main machine learning components are: (1) a Random For-
est Classiﬁer to identify tree-covered areas combined with
image segmentation to delineate individual trees, (2) Deep
Learning models to classify tree species, and (3) a carbon
calculator tool to estimate the total biomass and carbon
sequestered in trees.
3.1. Data
2D Imagery. The National Agriculture Imagery Program
(NAIP) acquires aerial imagery every other year at a spatial
resolution of 0.6 m on U.S. national scale. Multi-spectral
bands of red, green, blue and near-infrared are simultane-
ously collected during full leaves season. NAIP has been
consistently collected for the past two decades, making the
data source an excellent candidate to track tree coverage,
tree growths, and to detect changes in land coverage.
3D LiDAR. LiDAR 3D point clouds are used to extract
tree heights, and to calibrate the allometric relations for
each tree species. Compared to aerial imagery, LiDAR
data is much more expensive to collect, thus unavailable
for a major fraction of geographies. Therefore, it is critical
to estimate tree height from 2D imagery in order to scale
to large geographies where only aerial imagery is readily
available.Quantiﬁcation of Carbon Sequestration in Urban Forests
Figure 2. Multi-spectral NAIP imagery (a) and its corresponding
segmentation for individual tree crowns (b). The allometric relation
between tree crown diameter and tree height for Pin oak tree is
illustrated (c) alongside the estimates of its corresponding total
biomass (d).
Tree Species. Labeled tree species data is available from
many municipalities (NYC-Street-Tree-Map, 2015) as part
of their effort to quantify the beneﬁt of urban forests (Open-
Trees.org). Typically, data collection is crowd-sourced with
speciﬁc tree attributes getting captured such as: tree species,
tree location, and diameter at breast height.
3.2. Tree detection and segmentation
We utilize spectral information from remote sensing images
to delineate trees from other land cover classes. Employing
the red and near-infrared spectral information, we com-
pute the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)
(Pettorelli, 2013) from the NAIP imagery. The NDVI is
commonly used to separate vegetation from other classes
like roads, buildings, bare land, and/or water. Within the
vegetation class, sub-classiﬁcation is achieved by training a
Random Forest (RF) model to distinguish trees from grasses
or bushes after incorporating additional information like
image texture.
Once the tree mask is generated, segmentation algorithms
such as “watershed” (Wang et al., 2004) is applied to cluster
pixels that share common spectral and textural characteris-
tics. The clustered pixels is converted to (vector) polygons
for identiﬁcation of the tree crown boundary in order to de-
termine the canopy diameter. Tree crown diameters are then
used to correlate against tree heights to separately establish
the allometric equation for each tree species.
3.3. Tree height estimation
By virtue of a tree species-speciﬁc allometric equation, the
height of a tree may get estimated from its crown diameters.In our work, the allometric equation is modeled by a linear
ﬁt1mapping the crown size extracted from NAIP imagery
to the tree height ground truth extracted from LiDAR data.
Once established, the model is applied to areas where no
LiDAR data is available.
3.4. Tree species classiﬁcation
Since tree species information is vital to estimate carbon
storage, we train a convolutional neural network (CNN) to
classify tree species from NAIP imagery. In our approach,
the NAIP images get diced into 3232tiles. In contrast
to standard models of RGB channels, we harness all four
spectral bands of the NAIP imagery. The neural network
represents a modiﬁed ResNet34 (He et al., 2016) which
allows four-channel images as input. The training data is
pre-processed by cropping the NAIP data centered around
each location of the labeled trees. The trained model is run
across all target areas to generate corresponding tree species
maps.
3.5. Carbon sequestration
We assume the carbon stored is equivalent to about 50%
of the total biomass of a tree (Thomas & Martin, 2012).
The AGB can be calculated for each tree based on crown
diameter and its corresponding height estimation. Based
on our discussion in Sec. 2, the carbon sequestered in trees
approximately follows 0:65AGB .
4. Experiments and Results
We apply our pipeline to the New York City (NYC) area to
demonstrate our process of carbon sequestration quantiﬁca-
tion. LiDAR data was acquired in 2017 over Staten Island
borough, NYC (NYC-LiDAR), and tree species data was
collected across all ﬁve boroughs in NYC in 2015 along the
public roads, only (NYC-Street-Tree-Map, 2015). Trees not
close to roads did not get a record in the survey—including
those in parks and private properties. We processed a total
of 56 NAIP tiles 50 km by 50 km in size, a total of about 50
GB in data volume. A sample view of the RGB composite
depicts Fig. 2a.
Concerning tree delineation, an RF classiﬁer is used to
discriminate two classes—tree vs. anything else. Training
data is manually labeled and gets employed to train the RF
model that generates a tree coverage map. Once the tree-
covered area is separated from the other land, individual
trees is delineated by means of the watershed segmentation
method. Fig. 2b serves as illustration. Finally, the tree
1In some cases a more complex relationship may exist between
tree crown diameter and tree height (Chave et al., 2005). Ac-
cordingly, the linear approximation may over or under represent
biomass estimates.Quantiﬁcation of Carbon Sequestration in Urban Forests
Figure 3. Tree species classiﬁcation map for four tree species in
New York City. The corresponding labels are referenced in Table 1.
Table 1. Data set of tree species and tree dry mass density.
Tree type Label # points (kg/m3)
London plane tree 0 55,903 560
Honeylocust 1 43,974 755
Callery pear 2 42,384 690
Pin oak 3 30,575 705
Total 172,876
crown diameter is calculated based on the assumption that
the crown renders approximately circular in shape, and that
the diameter is proportional to the square root of the crown
polygon’s area.
We reuse the same NAIP tiles for tree species classiﬁcation.
The dominant four species in NYC are sampled to generate
the training data, as listed in Tab. 1. The model achieves a
classiﬁcation accuracy of 80% on the test split. The model
is then applied across all the NAIP data after splitting into
3232tiles, cf. (Zhou et al., 2020) for details. The ones
with a mean NDVI value lower than zero get discarded2. A
sample tree species classiﬁcation map is shown in Fig. 3.
The tree species of each tree’s crown polygon derives from
pixel-based majority vote.
In the next step we estimate tree heights from crown diame-
ters. We ﬁrst process the LiDAR point cloud to generate a
canopy height model resulting in a height-from-ground map.
For each crown polygon, we query multiple points against
the LiDAR height map in order to deﬁne the corresponding
2typically non-vegetation areas like buildings, roads, water
body, etc.
Figure 4. Carbon stored in individual trees mapped for the Upper
West Side of NYC. For visual & geographic orientation: the lower-
left corner of the image hosts the Central Park.
mean as ground truth. Then, we derive a linear regression
of the tree crown diameter vs. the tree height for each tree
species. This process assembles a training data set from
the LiDAR-covered areas. The linear regression curves (cf.
Fig. 2c) infer the tree height from the crown polygons.
The above-ground biomass is calculated for each tree based
on crown diameter and tree height taking into account the
tree-speciﬁc density as listed in Tab. 1 (World-Agroforestry).
We set the form factor for each tree species to F= 1, and
we estimate the AGB based on Eq. 1. Total biomass depends
on tree sizes as depicted by Fig. 2d for Pin oaks.
A resulting map of carbon sequestered in trees is depicted
by Fig. 4 for the area of the Upper West Side in Manhattan,
NYC. We estimate the total amount of carbon stored in the
urban forests of Manhattan to about 52;000tons. We base
this calculation on summing up the results of each individual
tree segmented in the NAIP data. (Nowak et al., 2018)
approximates 1.2 million tons for the total carbon stored in
the whole of NYC’s urban forests. Breaking down this ﬁgure
in proportion to the ratio of the number of trees in Manhattan
versus the total number of such in NYC, the carbon stored
in Manhattan trees is 43;500tons. Carbon sequestration
in Manhattan neighborhood trees is quantitatively consistent
with our estimation to the order of magnitude.
5. Conclusions
Precise quantiﬁcation of carbon sequestration on individual
tree level may enable an improved carbon trading market-
place where such information is shared in aggregated ﬁgures,
only. Here we demonstrated an approach to estimate carbon
stored in urban forests built on public data sets. We use
aerial imagery, high-quality 3D LiDAR point cloud data,
and tree species surveys to build high-resolution carbon se-
questration maps. The methodology allows to map carbon
sequestered by individual trees for subsequent aggregation
to the level of city street to continental scale.Quantiﬁcation of Carbon Sequestration in Urban Forests
Broader Impact
Carbon trading markets and GHG offset require transparent
and veriﬁable methods to quantify the total carbon seques-
tration. The “bottom-up” approach introduced in this work
is able to estimate total amounts of carbon sequestered in
trees. As a valuable result, a temporal sequence of spatial
maps indicating the carbon density captured by (sub-)urban
forests may track changes in carbon sequestration on an
annual basis.
References
Bastin, J., Finegold, Y ., Garcia, C., Mollicone, D., Rezende,
M., Routh, D., Zohner, C., and et al, T. C. The global tree
restoration potential. Science , 365(6648):76–79, 2019.
Cairns, M. A., Brown, S., Helmer, E. H., and Baumgardner,
G. A. Root biomass allocation in the world’s upland
forests. Oecologia , 111(1):1–11, 1997.
Chave, J., Andalo, C., Brown, S., and et al. Tree allometry
and improved estimation of carbon stocks and balance in
tropical forests. Oecologia , 145(1):87–99, 2005.
Chave, J., R ´ejou-M ´echa, M., B ´urquez, A., Chidumayo, E.,
Colgan, M., Delitti, W., and et al. Improved allometric
models to estimate the aboveground biomass of tropical
trees. Global change biology , 20(10):3177–3190, 2014.
Guan, H., Yu, Y ., Ji, Z., Li, J., and Zhang, Q. Deep learning-
based tree classiﬁcation using mobile lidar data. Remote
Sensing Letters , 6(11):864–873, 2015.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learn-
ing for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pp. 770–778, 2016.
IPCC. The intergovernmental panel on climate change. URL
https://www.ipcc.ch/ .
Klein, L. J., Albrecht, C. M., Zhou, W., Siebenschuh, C.,
Pankanti, S., Hamann, H. F., and Lu, S. N-dimensional
geospatial data and analytics for critical infrastructure
risk assessment. In IEEE International Conference on
Big Data (Big Data) , pp. 5637–5643, 2019.
Koch, G. W., Sillett, S. C., Jennings, G. M., and Davis, S. D.
The limits to tree height. Nature , 428(6985):851–854,
2004.
L¨utjens, B., Liebenwein, L., and Kramer, K. Ma-
chine learning-based estimation of forest carbon stocks
to increase transparency of forest preservation efforts.
arXiv:1912.07850 , 2019.Nowak, D., Bodine, A. R., and et al. The urban forest of new
york city. Technical Report 117, Newtown Square, PA:
US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern
Research Station, 2018.
NYC-LiDAR. Topobathymetric lidar
data (2017). URL https://data.
cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/
Topobathymetric-LiDAR-Data-2017-/
7sc8-jtbz .
NYC-Street-Tree-Map. New york city street tree map.
Technical report, New York City, NY , 2015. URL
https://tree-map.nycgovparks.org/ .
OpenTrees.org. Opentrees. URL https://www.
OpenTrees.org .
Pettorelli, N. The normalized difference vegetation index .
Oxford University Press, 2013.
Sileshi, G. A critical review of forest biomass estimation
models, common mistakes and corrective measures. For-
est Ecology and Management , 329:237–254, 2014.
Thomas, S. and Martin, A. Carbon content of tree tissues: a
synthesis. Forests , 3(2):332–352, 2012.
Wang, L., Gong, P., and Biging, G. S. Individual tree-
crown delineation and treetop detection in high-spatial-
resolution aerial imagery. Photogrammetric Engineering
& Remote Sensin , 70(3):351–357, 2004.
World-Agroforestry. Icraf database. URL http://db.
worldagroforestry.org//wd .
Zhou, W. and Klein, L. J. Monitoring the impact of wildﬁres
on tree species with deep learning. arXiv:2011.02514 ,
2020.
Zhou, W., Klein, L. J., and Lu, S. PAIRS AutoGeo: an auto-
mated machine learning framework for massive geospa-
tial data. In IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data) , 2020.