Reconstructing Aerosol Vertical Proﬁles with Aggregate Output Learning
Soﬁja Stefanovi ´c1Shahine Bouabid2Philip Stier1Athanasios Nenes3Dino Sejdinovi ´c2
Abstract
Aerosol-cloud interactions constitute the largest
source of uncertainty in assessments of the anthro-
pogenic climate change. This uncertainty arises in
part from the inability to observe aerosol amounts
at the cloud formation levels, and, more broadly,
the vertical distribution of aerosols. Hence, we
often have to settle for less informative two-
dimensional proxies, i.e. vertically aggregated
data. In this work, we formulate the problem of
disaggregation of vertical proﬁles of aerosols. We
propose some initial solutions for such aggregate
output regression problem and demonstrate their
potential on climate model data.
1. Introduction
Aerosols are atmospheric particles that inﬂuence the Earth’s
energy budget both by scattering radiation directly (direct ef-
fect) [ 8], and by acting as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN)
that modulate cloud droplet number and radiative proper-
ties (indirect effect). Aerosol-cloud interactions (ACI) con-
tribute the largest uncertainty to the projection of anthro-
pogenic climate change, in part due to the poor estimates
of the abundance and vertical distribution of aerosols in the
atmosphere [4].
While ﬁeld measurement campaigns provide detailed
aerosol data, these are spatio-temporally sparse [1, 13] and
provide insufﬁcient constraints on aerosol global distribu-
tion. In contrast, satellite observations offer long term global
records, but they are typically limited to measurements of
aerosol optical properties [12].
A widespread proxy for aerosol concentration or CCN is
Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD), deﬁned at a given wavelength
1Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics,
University of Oxford, UK2Department of Statistics, Uni-
versity of Oxford, UK3Laboratory of Atmospheric Pro-
cesses and their Impacts, ´Ecole Polytechnique F ´ed´erale de
Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Soﬁja Ste-
fanovi ´c<soﬁja.stefanovic@physics.ox.ac.uk >, Shahine Bouabid
<shahine.bouabid@stats.ox.ac.uk >.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning Workshop at
ICML 2021.as:
AOD () =ZH
0bext(;h) dh (1)
wherebextis the extinction coefﬁcient1and the integral is
taken over the height Hof the atmospheric column.
While AOD is useful as a measure of total aerosol load
within the column, it does not provide information on the
vertical distribution of aerosols, which strongly inﬂuences
both the magnitudes and even the sign of the aerosol direct
and indirect effects. For example, both modelling [ 14] and
observational studies [ 10] ﬁnd AOD to be inadequate for
assessing aerosol-cloud interactions over vast subtropical
ocean areas, which play a key role in determining the radia-
tion balance of the earth. However, in both cases, vertically
resolved aerosol extinction coefﬁcient bextshows signiﬁ-
cantly higher correlations with CCN or its proxies.
We investigate the reconstruction of aerosol vertical pro-
ﬁles using as inputs meteorology and chemistry covariates.
While our prime motivation is to reconstruct bextfrom satel-
lite measurements of AOD [ 12,18], the intricacies of com-
bining measurements from different instruments makes it
challenging to validate any proposed methodology. On the
other hand, climate models have readily available aerosol
vertical proﬁles and are self-consistent in the sense that all
data is jointly observed. Hence, we propose to use data
from NASA’s Goddard Earth Observing System, version 5
(GEOS-5) Nature Run (G5NR) simulation [ 17] –– a high-
resolution global circulation model [ 3] for model develop-
ment. We choose sulfates (SO 4) as a case study –– these are
a major contributor to anthropogenic aerosol pollution and
arise primarily through oxidation of sulfur dioxide (SO 2)
emitted from burning fossil fuel. G5NR provides matched
samples of the vertically resolved sulfate mass concentra-
tions [SO 4] and the mass column density deﬁned as:
SO4=ZH
0[SO4](h) dh: (2)
To mirror our motivating application, i.e. predicting verti-
cally resolved bextfrom AOD observations only, we propose
in this work to probe the vertical reconstruction of [SO 4]
givenSO4.
1The sum of contributions from particle-light scattering plus
absorption of light by particles.Reconstructing Aerosol Vertical Proﬁles with Aggregate Output Learning
Motivated by the study of cloud vertical structures, the
task of reconstructing three-dimensional (3D) proﬁles cor-
responding to two-dimensional observations (2D) has been
framed in the past as fully supervised learning [ 6]. Col-
lecting high quality observational data of aerosol vertical
proﬁles at large scale is however unfeasible, thus making
fully supervised approaches unsuitable. In fact, while in
previous work Nair and Yu [9]have addressed the task of
CCN number prediction from atmospheric measurements,
they resorted to using model data in order to apply fully
supervised learning models.
Spatial disaggregation or statistical downscaling is the task
of inferring subgrid details given a low resolution observa-
tion process. Postulating an underlying ﬁne grained spatial
ﬁeld that aggregates into coarse observations, this problem
can be framed as weakly supervised learning [ 21] with ag-
gregate outputs. Existing works [ 2,7,15,16,19,20] have
only considered applications to 2D ﬁelds, yet this rationale
can be extended to 3D ﬁelds that aggregate with respect
to height into a 2D ﬁeld. Furthermore, Kipling et al. [5]
show that aerosols’ behavior is driven by a relatively small
number of atmospheric processes, suggesting that having
access to 3D observations of these processes could help
vertical proﬁle reconstruction. We thus propose to frame
the reconstruction of [SO 4] vertical proﬁle as the vertical
disaggregation of SO4using 3D atmospheric covariates.
Our contributions are threefold: (i)We propose the novel
problem of aerosols vertical proﬁles disaggregation given
vertically aggregated targets and 3D atmospheric covariates;
(ii)We introduce a dataset of 2D+3D meteorological and
chemistry covariates from NASA’s G5NR simulation, with
focus on sulfates aerosols; (iii)We describe baseline vertical
disaggregation models and demonstrate them on the sulfate
mass column density disaggregation problem.
2. Dataset
NASA’s GEOS-5 Nature Run (G5NR) is a 2-year (June
2005-May 2007) global, non-hydrostatic2mesoscale3sim-
ulation with a 7 km horizontal resolution and 72 vertical
levels (up to 85km). This simulation includes standard me-
teorological parameters, as well as aerosol tracers (dust,
sea salt, sulfate, black and organic carbon), O 3, CO and
CO 2. The simulation is driven by prescribed sea-surface
temperature and sea-ice, daily volcanic and biomass burning
emissions, and high-resolution inventories of anthropogenic
sources.
We used the instantaneous (30min) products relevant for
2Where the hydrostatic approximation is not made, i.e. the
vertical momentum equation is solved.
3Phenomena occurring on scales of tens to hundreds of kilome-
ters.
Figure 1. SO 4column density ﬁeld from dataset plotted for one
time step; our objective is to obtain a vertically resolved version of
this ﬁeld.
sulfate formation with 7km horizontal resolution from the
15thof January 2007 as the basis for our dataset. Sulfates
are a major contributor to the total AOD in our dataset (see
Figure 3 in Appendix A). As depicted in Figure 1, the dataset
is located in the Paciﬁc Ocean (10-30S, 80-100W).
Table 1 outlines the variables used in the dataset and the
notation that will be used to refer to these in the following
sections.
Name Notation Units
2DSO4column density SO4 kgm-2
Liquid water path LWP kg m-2
3DSO4mass mixing ratio rSO4 kgkg-1
SO2mass mixing ratio rSO2 kgkg-1
Relative Humidity RH 1
Air temperature T K
Vertical velocity w ms-1
Cloud liquid water q kgkg-1
Moist air density  kgm-3
Table 1. Dataset variables, “2D” corresponds to variables indexed
by time, latitude and longitude while “3D” corresponds to variables
that also have a height dimension.
The groundtruth 3D SO 4mass concentration is calculated
by multiplying the SO 4mass mixing ratio with the (moist)
air density in the column as:
[SO4] =rSO4 (3)
We verify numerically that this ﬁeld aggregates with respect
to height into the 2D ﬁeld SO4provided by the dataset.
3. Baseline Methodologies
In this section, we describe baseline models. While our
experiments focuses on SO 4column mass density disaggre-Reconstructing Aerosol Vertical Proﬁles with Aggregate Output Learning
gation, we employ broad notations for the sake of generality.
3.1. Problem Statement
Letffx(i)
jgH
i=1;yj;zjgn
j=1a collection of bagged observa-
tions.x(i)
j2Rdxis a spatial covariate that admits 3D
coordinates following latitude, longitude and height and
belongs tojthheight column. We denote its tensor con-
catenation as xj:= [x(1)
j::: x(H)
j]>2RHdxand de-
noteX:= [x1:::xn]>2RnHdx.yj2Rdyis a
column-level covariate that admits 2D latitude and longi-
tude coordinates and zj2Ris the column covariate we
wish to disaggregate along height. Likewise, we use ten-
sor representations Y:= [y1::: yn]>2Rndyand
z= [z1::: zn]>2Rn.
Letf:Rdx!Rbe the function of interest we want to
recover and consider the linear aggregation operator deﬁned
for thejthcolumn as Aggj:f7!R
jthcolumnf(x) dh(x)
wherehis a positive measure of height. Then we postulate
an aggregate observation model
zj= Aggj(f) +"j (4)
where"jN(0;2)is observation noise.
In ﬁnite data size, we substitute Aggj(f)with an approxi-
mation Agg(f(xj))using trapezoidal rule
Agg(f(xj)) =H 1X
i=1f(x(i)
j) +f(x(i+1)
j)
2h(i)
j (5)
where h(i)
jis the height difference between x(i+1)
j and
x(i)
j. With notation abuse, we will use in what follows
notation Agg()for the approximate aggregation over height
of any tensor that admits a height dimension. For example,
Agg(f(X)) = [Agg(f(x1)):::Agg(f(xn))]>2Rn.
To probe the potential of the vertical disaggregation task,
we propose as a ﬁrst approach to adopt a plain linear model
baseline and make hypothesis f(x) =x>+cwith2
Rdxandc2R. Without loss of generality, we assume that
intercept is included in the covariates, i.e. c= 0.
3.2. Aggregate Ridge Regression
Given observation model (4), it is natural to consider as an
objective the regularized quadratic risk between aggregate
observations and the aggregated prediction, which writes
min
2Rdxkz Agg(X)k2
2+kk2
2 (6)
with regularization weight >0.
By linearity of the aggregation operator, the solution to (6) is
simply the solution to the ridge regression of 3D covariatesaggregated over height Agg(X)against aggregate targets z,
given by
= 
Agg(X)>Agg(X) +Idx 1Agg(X)>z (7)
While straightforward, this method has the advantage of
scaling seamlessly to a huge amount of data since it only
incurs aO(d3
x)matrix inversion computational cost.
3.3. Two-Stage Aggregate Ridge Regression
In the above, it is implicitly assumed we can establish a
mappingj7!Aggj(f)that associates each column to its
aggregated value based on its index only. In doing so, each
column is treated and regressed independently from the
others. This is unrealistic since we expect continuous ﬁelds
to correlate across spatial and temporal dimensions. On
the other hand, the 2D column-level covariates yjprovide
information about columns correlations. This in turn can be
used to embed columns dependence information by learning
a mappingyj7!Aggj(f).
In a second baseline, we augment the aggregate ridge regres-
sion model by a two-stage process that enables leveraging
the information conveyed by 2D covariates.
Stage 1 We ﬁrst regress the 2D covariates Yagainst ag-
gregated columns values Agg(X). For the sake of sim-
plicity, we assume linear model g(y) =>yand minimize
regularized empirical quadratic risk
min
2RdykAgg(X) Yk2
2+kk2
2 (8)
where >0is a regularization weight. As per above, this
admits closed form solution
= 
Y>Y+Idy 1Y>Agg(X) (9)
Stage 2 We now use the prediction provided by g(Y)
to regress against aggregate targets z. Let :=
Y 
Y>Y+Idy 1Y>. The evaluation of the regressor
learnt in Step 1 writes g(Y) =Y=Agg(X). Hence,
substituting the latter to the aggregated columns values in
(6), we obtain empirical risk
min
2Rdxkz Agg(X)k2
2+kk2
2 (10)
which admits closed form minimizer
= 
Agg(X)>2Agg(X) +Idx 1Agg(X)>z:
(11)
Comparing (11) to (7), we can interpret as a regularizing
term enforcing functional smoothness across 2D covariates.Reconstructing Aerosol Vertical Proﬁles with Aggregate Output Learning
Figure 2. Top/Middle-Top vertical proﬁles of SO 2mixing ratio
and cloud liquid water, used as 3D covariates for prediction;
Middle-Bottom: predicted [SO 4] vertical proﬁle with two-stage
ridge regression baseline; Bottom: groundtruth [SO 4] vertical
proﬁle.
4. Experiments
We demonstrate and evaluate the baseline models at the
vertical disaggregation of sulfate mass column density us-
ing dataset introduced in Section 2. The ridge regression
baseline is referred to as RIDGE and the two-stage ridge ap-
proach as TWO -STAGE . We report evaluation against the un-
observed groundtruth 3D sulfate mass concentration proﬁles
[SO 4] and also compare the vertically aggregated predic-
tion against the 2D sulfate mass column density SO4used
for training. Scores are reported in root mean square error
(RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE) and Pearson correla-
tion (Corr.). Experiments are implemented in PyTorch [11]
and code and dataset are made publicly available4.
Model Setup: Since RIDGE only uses 3D co-
variates, we use as input 3D variable x =
(latitude;longitude;altitude;rSO2;RH;T;w;q ) where
covariates notations are deﬁned in Table 1. For TWO -
STAGE , we can additionally leverage column-level
2D covariates in the ﬁrst stage. We use 2D covariate
y= (latitude;longitude;SO4;LWP)to ﬁt the ﬁrst step, and
then use the same covariates as RIDGE for the second step.
We emphasize that while SO4is also our aggregate target z,
it can nonetheless be used as a column-level covariate. All
input variables are standardized.
4https://github.com/shahineb/
aerosols-vertical-profilesRIDGE TWO -STAGE
2DRMSE (10-6) 3.47 3.52
MAE (10-6) 3.39 3.39
Corr. (%) 93.5 87.5
3DRMSE (10-10) 2.71 2.50
MAE (10-10) 1.07 1.10
Corr. (%) 62.5 63.9
Table 2. Evaluation scores on vertical proﬁle reconstruction; “2D”
refers to evaluation against aggregate SO4targets used for training;
“3D” refers to evaluation against vertical groundtruth
Results: As depicted in Figure 2, we observe the model
is able to resolve vertically distributed details that correlate
with the input covariates. Table 2 suggests that the column-
level knowledge conveyed by 2D covariates is reﬂected in
better performance of the two-staged ridge regression model
on the reconstructed 3D proﬁles.
The scene plotted in Figure 2 shows the patterns of the cloud
liquid water reproduced in the prediction –– while the cloud
layer can be identiﬁed in the groundtruth there are no clus-
ters of high concentration within the cloud layer as seen
in the prediction. Cloud liquid water is taken as a proxy
for where oxidation of SO 2would occur –– having explicit
oxidant ﬁelds could help reduce the bias due to the cloud
ﬁeld. Both prediction and groundtruth feature a layer of SO 4
that extends across all longitudes and beyond 13km in alti-
tude and that are consistent with the SO 2mass mixing ratio.
Although the prediction in this scene fails to reproduce the
thin layer of higher concentration (around 90W longitudes)
consistent with high SO 2, some predictions are strongly in-
ﬂuences by the SO 2mass mixing ratio and reproduce its
pattern in full (see Appendix B).
5. Discussion
Motivated by the prediction of better vertically resolved
aerosol proxies, we introduced the new task of vertical dis-
aggregation from aggregated 2D observations. We provide
a dataset of G5NR model data including diverse meteoro-
logical and chemical covariates, propose baseline vertical
disaggregation models, and demonstrate their performance
at sulfates mass column density disaggregation.
In future work, we intend to apply baseline models to col-
located observations from MODIS 2D AOD product [ 12],
CALIOP vertical lidar measurements and more widespread
measurements of atmospheric states and compositions. A
major beneﬁt from doing that would be increasing the spa-
tiotemporal resolution of CALIOP. Simulatenously, we aim
to deﬁne evaluation metrics that sensibly penalise vertical
incoherence, and are hence naturally suited to this prob-
lem. Finally, while we limit ourselves to demonstrating
simple linear models operating on aggregate output in thisReconstructing Aerosol Vertical Proﬁles with Aggregate Output Learning
work, further directions will include both non-linear (e.g.
kernel-based) and Bayesian methods. This will enable a
ﬁner treatment of input covariates along with uncertainty
quantiﬁcation.
Acknowledgements
This project receives funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under
Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 860100.
References
[1]M. O. Andreae. Correlation between cloud condensa-
tion nuclei concentration and aerosol optical thickness
in remote and polluted regions. Atmospheric Chem-
istry and Physics , 9(2):543–556, 2009.
[2]Siu Lun Chau, Shahine Bouabid, and Dino Sejdinovic.
Deconditional Downscaling with Gaussian Processes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.12909 , 2021.
[3]Gregory M. Flato. Earth system models: an overview.
WIREs Climate Change , 2011.
[4]IPCC. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change . Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY , USA,
2013.
[5]Z. Kipling, P. Stier, C. E. Johnson, G. W. Mann, N. Bel-
louin, S. E. Bauer, T. Bergman, M. Chin, T. Diehl, S. J.
Ghan, T. Iversen, A. Kirkev ˚ag, H. Kokkola, X. Liu,
G. Luo, T. van Noije, K. J. Pringle, K. von Salzen,
M. Schulz, Ø. Seland, R. B. Skeie, T. Takemura, K. Tsi-
garidis, and K. Zhang. What controls the vertical dis-
tribution of aerosol? relationships between process
sensitivity in hadgem3–ukca and inter-model variation
from aerocom phase ii. Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics , 16(4):2221–2241, 2016.
[6]Jussi Leinonen, Alexandre Guillaume, and Tianle
Yuan. Reconstruction of cloud vertical structure with a
generative adversarial network. Geophysical Research
Letters , 2019.
[7]Ho Chung Leon Law, Dino Sejdinovic, Ewan
Cameron, Tim C.D. Lucas, Seth Flaxman, Kather-
ine Battle, and Kenji Fukumizu. Variational learning
on aggregate outputs with Gaussian processes. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
2018.[8]Robert A. McCormick and John H. Ludwig. Climate
Modiﬁcation by Atmospheric Aerosols. Science , 156
(3780):1358–1359, June 1967.
[9]A. A. Nair and F. Yu. Using machine learning to de-
rive cloud condensation nuclei number concentrations
from commonly available measurements. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics , 20(21):12853–12869, 2020.
[10] D. Painemal, F.-L. Chang, R. Ferrare, S. Burton, Z. Li,
W. L. Smith Jr, P. Minnis, Y . Feng, and M. Clay-
ton. Reducing uncertainties in satellite estimates of
aerosol–cloud interactions over the subtropical ocean
by integrating vertically resolved aerosol observations.
Atmospheric chemistry and physics .
[11] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam
Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga,
Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang,
Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani,
Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie
Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 .
2019.
[12] L. A. Remer, Y . J. Kaufman, D. Tanr ´e, S. Mattoo,
D. A. Chu, J. V . Martins, R.-R. Li, C. Ichoku, R. C.
Levy, R. G. Kleidman, T. F. Eck, E. Vermote, and B. N.
Holben. The MODIS Aerosol Algorithm, Products,
and Validation. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences ,
2005.
[13] D. V . Spracklen, K. S. Carslaw, U. P ¨oschl, A. Rap,
and P. M. Forster. Global cloud condensation nuclei
inﬂuenced by carbonaceous combustion aerosol. At-
mospheric Chemistry and Physics , 11(17):9067–9087,
2011.
[14] Philip Stier. Limitations of passive remote sensing
to constrain global cloud condensation nuclei. Atmo-
spheric Chemistry and Physics , 2016.
[15] Yusuke Tanaka, Toshiyuki Tanaka, Tomoharu Iwata,
Takeshi Kurashima, Maya Okawa, Yasunori Akagi,
and Hiroyuki Toda. Spatially aggregated Gaussian
processes with multivariate areal outputs. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019.
[16] Arto Klam Ville Tanskanen , Krista Longi. Non-
Linearities in Gaussian Processes with Integral Ob-
servations. IEEE international Workshop on Machine
Learning for Signal , 2020.
[17] L.E. Ott W. Putman, A.M. da Silva and A. Dar-
menov. Model conﬁguration for the 7-km geos-5natureReconstructing Aerosol Vertical Proﬁles with Aggregate Output Learning
run, ganymed release (non-hydrostatic 7 km global
mesoscale simulation). gmao ofﬁce note no.5 (ver-
sion 1.0), 2014. URL http://gmao.gsfc.nasa.
gov/pubs/office_notes .
[18] D. M. Winker, J. L. Tackett, B. J. Getzewich, Z. Liu,
M. A. Vaughan, and R. R. Rogers. The global 3-d
distribution of tropospheric aerosols as characterized
by caliop. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 13(6):
3345–3361, 2013.
[19] Fariba Youseﬁ, Michael Thomas Smith, and Mauri-
cio A. ´Alvarez. Multi-task learning for aggregated
data using Gaussian processes. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2019.
[20] Yivan Zhang, Nontawat Charoenphakdee, Zhenguo
Wu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Learning from aggre-
gate observations. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2020.
[21] Zhi-Hua Zhou. A brief introduction to weakly super-
vised learning. National Science Review , 2017.A. Dataset Speciﬁcations
Figure 3. Dataset 2D aerosol ﬁelds for one timestep; Top: Total
extinction AOD; Middle: SO 4extinction AOD; Bottom: SO 4
column mass densityReconstructing Aerosol Vertical Proﬁles with Aggregate Output Learning
B. Additional Experimental Results
Figure 4. Vertical slices at latitude 23.75S;Rows 1-5: vertical
proﬁles of 3D input covariates; Row 6 predicted vertical proﬁle
of [SO 4] with two-stage aggregate ridge regression model; Row 7
groundtruth [SO 4].
Figure 5. Vertical slices at latitude 12.5S;Rows 1-5: vertical
proﬁles of 3D input covariates; Row 6 predicted vertical proﬁle
of [SO 4] with two-stage aggregate ridge regression model; Row 7
groundtruth [SO 4].