Leveraging Domain Adaptation for
Low-Resource Geospatial Machine Learning
Jack Lynch12Sam Wookey2
Abstract
Machine learning in remote sensing has matured
alongside a proliferation in availability and res-
olution of geospatial imagery, but its utility is
bottlenecked by the need for labeled data. What’s
more, many labeled geospatial datasets are spe-
ciﬁc to certain regions, instruments, or extreme
weather events. We investigate the application of
modern domain-adaptation to multiple proposed
geospatial benchmarks, uncovering unique chal-
lenges and proposing solutions to them.
1. Introduction
The use of machine learning for remote sensing has matured
alongside an increase in the availability and resolution of
satellite imagery, enabling advances in such tasks as land use
classiﬁcation ( Campos-Taberner et al. ,2020 ), natural risk
estimation ( Cerr´on et al. ,2020 ), disaster damage assessment
(Xu et al. ,2019 ), and agricultural forecasting ( Lees et al. ,
2020 ).
However, many labeled geospatial datasets—including all
of those used in the previously cited works—only cover
speciﬁc regions of the world, limiting their utility and adop-
tion elsewhere. Xu et al. explicitly cite this limitation as a
focus of future work. Furthermore, these datasets are often
limited to a single instrument and method of acquisition,
limiting their generalization to acquisitions made by other
instruments and at other angles.
Domain adaptation attempts to leverage labeled “source”
data toward learning on some separate “target” dataset, for
which only unlabeled data exists. In the context of climate-
focused machine learning, it provides a potential framework
for scaffolding innovations beyond their limiting datasets to
other areas, instruments, and contexts.
1Department of Electrical Engineering, NC State Univer-
sity, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA2Masterful.AI, San Fran-
cisco, California, USA. Correspondence to: Jack Lynch <jm-
lynch3@ncsu.edu, jack@masterful.ai >.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at
ICML 2021 . Copyright 2021 by the author(s).In this proposal, we claim domain adaptation will be neces-
sary to widen the equitable adoption of machine learning
for geospatial applications, enabling its use for environmen-
tal monitoring and forecasting in areas of the world with-
out labeled data. We propose multiple geospatial domain-
adaptation benchmarks, explore the challenges they pose
to traditional domain-adaptation algorithms, and suggest
methods of improvement.
2. Geospatial Domain Adaptation
The application of domain adaptation to geospatial machine
learning requires both datasets and methods tailored to the
context of remote sensing.
2.1. Proposed Benchmarks
For our initial experiments we propose two domain-
adaptation benchmarks derived from the well-known
SpaceNet datasets of labeled satellite imagery ( Etten et al. ,
2019 ). As noted by Dao et al. (2019 ), land use determines a
signiﬁcant portion of human carbon emission; as such, we
focus on building segmentation as a useful tool in the moni-
toring and prediction of emissions. We measure the Jaccard
index ( Jaccard ,1912 ), or intersection over union (IoU), of
target-dataset segmentations as our primary performance
metric.
SpaceNet-2 contains imagery and corresponding building
annotations for four cities: Las Vegas, Paris, Shanghai, and
Khartoum. We may treat one subset of cities as the “source”
and another subset as the “target” and attempt adaptation
from one to the other: for example, from Las Vegas to
Khartoum. The ability to generalize building segmentation
from well-labeled cities to growing ones in different areas of
the world would greatly increase the utility of such methods.
Given compute constraints, we restrict our experiments here
to those treating Khartoum as the target dataset.
SpaceNet-4 contains imagery of speciﬁc regions for varying
angles off-nadir, loosely grouped into “on-nadir” for low
angles, “off nadir” for moderate angles, and “very off-nadir”
for large angles. Off-nadir imagery introduces a lower effec-
tive resolution and is marked in urban settings by building
“tilt” relative to on-nadir imagery. We can attempt adaptationDomain Adaptation for Low-Resource GIS ML
(a) Las Vegas
 (b) Khartoum
 (c) On-Nadir
 (d) Very Off-Nadir
Figure 1. Example acquisitions from the SpaceNet-2 (left) and SpaceNet-4 (right) datasets. The shift from Las Vegas to Khartoum is
characterized by different colors, textures, building styles and arrangements, and (occasionally) the angle off-nadir. When moving from
On- to Off-Nadir data, buildings move from “top-down” footprints to three-dimensional objects, and the effective resolution degrades.
(a) Input
 (b) Ground Truth
 (c) ADVENT
 (d) Source-Only
Figure 2. Example predictions from both ADVENT and source-only (non-adaptive) Vegas-to-Khartoum training for (a). Both ADVENT
and source-only approaches fail to identify most “building” pixels, and ADVENT does not improve over source-only.
(a) GTA V
 (b) CityScapes
 (c) Las Vegas
 (d) Khartoum
Figure 3. Example labels for GTA, CityScapes, and the Las Vegas and Khartoum subsets of SpaceNet-2. Though GTA features some
ﬁner-grain labeling detail, it might otherwise be difﬁcult to tell its labels apart from those of CityScapes. In contrast, the binary labels of
Las Vegas and Khartoum are easily distinguished, most notably by the difference in building shapes and arrangement.Domain Adaptation for Low-Resource GIS ML
from on-nadir to off-nadir or very off-nadir imagery, from
off-nadir to very off-nadir, etc. As off-nadir imagery is often
the quickest path to imaging during disasters ( M. Bacastow
et al.,2019 ), the ability to extend more-common “on-nadir”
performance to off-nadir scenarios could aid in accelerating
disaster response.
Samples from these datasets are shown in Figure 1. No-
tably, off-nadir acquisition angle varies signiﬁcantly be-
tween cities in SpaceNet-2, suggesting the two benchmarks
feature some overlap in sources of difﬁculty.
2.2. Methods
For our experiments we adopt the ADVENT approach of Vu
et al. (2019 ), a relatively simple adversarial domain adapta-
tion method whose precursor ( Tsai et al. ,2020 ) serves as a
ﬁrst stage for the current state of the art ( Zhang et al. ,2021 ).
We perform all experiments using the same hyperparameters
provided in Vu et al. (2019 ).
Notably, the ADVENT method, alongside precursors like
Tsai et al. (2020 );Hoffman et al. (2017 ), assumes that source
and target label distributions are signiﬁcantly more similar
than their corresponding input distributions; otherwise, the
discriminator would be able to distinguish between even
exceptionally domain-general source and target predictions,
diminishing its utility as a regularizer.
2.3. Challenges
2.3.1. L IMITED SOURCE DATA
Most common domain-adaptation benchmarks—for exam-
ple, VisDA ( Peng et al. ,2017 ) in classiﬁcation or GTA-
to-CityScapes ( Richter et al. ,2016 ;Cordts et al. ,2016 ) in
segmentation—provide a large amount of labeled source
data; as such, many recent domain-adaptation algorithms
have not been examined in the context of limited source data
(what could be considered “few-shot” domain adaptation).
The few-shot limitations speciﬁc to adversarial domain adap-
tation are not well understood, but they are especially rele-
vant to geospatial machine learning, where new unlabeled
data appears daily but labeled datasets are often small. For
example, in our city-to-city benchmarks, no single city fea-
tures more than 5,000labeled samples, while none of on-
nadir, off-nadir, or very-off-nadir collections feature more
than 10,000.
We observe that this limited source data hampers the adap-
tive ability of ADVENT, often performing worse than
source-only training as shown in Table 1and Figure 21.
1For GTA-to-CityScapes, we report the ADVENT metric from
Vu et al. (2019 ) and the source-only metric from Tsai et al. (2020 ).
Though we didn’t replicate the results of Vu et al. due to compute
constraints, we extended their open-sourced code for our ownThough ADVENT trains stably for hundreds of thousands
of iterations on traditional domain-adaptation benchmarks,
on most city-to-city and nadir-angle paired datasets it can
only train for thousands before beginning to diverge. We
attribute this poor performance to discriminator overﬁtting
(Karras et al. ,2020 ), leading to the injection of unhelpful
gradients during training.
2.3.2. D ISPARATE LABEL DISTRIBUTIONS
As mentioned previously, adversarial methods like AD-
VENT and its predecessors assume that source and target
label distributions are signiﬁcantly more similar than their
corresponding image/input distributions. When label dis-
tributions are dissimilar, source and target predictions can
be more easily distinguished at the same level of domain-
generality.
Visual inspection suggests that the cities in SpaceNet-2 fea-
ture larger gaps between their label distributions than do
GTA and CityScapes (Figure 3, in the appendix), but this
remains to be rigorously examined. We plan to consult
structure-preserving dimensionality reduction through meth-
ods like UMAP ( McInnes et al. ,2020 ;Sainburg et al. ,2021 )
to assess the relative “gaps” between pairs of source and
target label distributions.
More speciﬁcally, a relative, quantitative assessment could
be made by applying persistent homology to UMAP com-
plexes of mixed source and target labels, observing average
cluster “label” purity (here, referring to the binary distinc-
tion of source versus target) as a function of increasing
similarity. Integrals of these purity curves—one for every
pair of source/target label distributions—could be used to
compare cluster separability between pairs of label distribu-
tions, in turn suggesting their inherent ease of discrimination
during adversarial training.
3. Proposed Solutions
To address the problems described above, we propose the
use of an adaptive discriminator as introduced in Karras
et al. (2020 ). Though our needs differ from theirs—we do
not fear augmentation leakage—an adaptive discriminator
should address both issues encountered:
•It has been shown effective at avoiding discriminator
overﬁtting in low-data regimes; and
•The geometric class of adaptive augmentations (rota-
tions, afﬁne transforms, etc.) can improve overlap in
label distributions, potentially further improving adver-
sarial performance.
Early results from the introduction of aggressive augmenta-
experiments.Domain Adaptation for Low-Resource GIS ML
Table 1. Improvement in target Intersection over Union (IoU) using ADVENT, relative to source-only training. V, S, P, and K represent
SpaceNet-2 data for cities Las Vegas, Shanghai, Paris, and Khartoum, respectively. On and V. Off represent SpaceNet-4 “on-nadir” and
“very off-nadir” subsets, respectively. GTA and CS represent the common domain-adaptation benchmark datasets of Grand Theft Auto
and CityScapes, respectively. Certain combinations were omitted due to compute constraints.
GTA !CS V !KV , P !KP , S !KV , S , P !KO N!V. O FF
IOU( A D V E N T ) 4 7 . 6 1 3 . 5 9 9 . 9 5 2 6 . 3 6 2 5 . 0 5 1 1 . 0 3
IOU(SRC-ONLY )3 6 . 6 1 5 . 0 9 1 7 . 5 62 3 . 6 2 3 0 . 0 9 1 4 . 7 7
 IOU +11.0  1.50  7.61 +2 .74  5.04  3.74
tions are promising (see Appendix).
With respect speciﬁcally to adaptation across instruments or
collection methods, as with on-to-off-nadir, we will investi-
gate modeling instrument parameters (e.g. off-nadir angle)
through matrix capsules ( Hinton et al. ,2018 ), adapted to
segmentation per LaLonde & Bagci (2018 ).
There is also work to be done in the construction of more
targeted geospatial domain-adaptation benchmark datasets.
For example, as off-nadir imagery is commonly used in
disaster response, a dataset for on-to-off-nadir damage esti-
mation would be more directly related to near-term applica-
tions.
Finally, geospatial domain adaptation has the unique facet of
near-unlimited unlabeled data; as such, in situations where
an appropriately delimited target dataset can be automat-
ically aggregated, domain-adaptive methods with limited
source data might beneﬁt greatly from self-supervised pre-
training, e.g. with Zbontar et al. (2021 ).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Leland McInnes for
his direction in determining how best to apply structure-
preserving dimensionality reduction to comparisons of dis-
tribution similarity, as well as Vu et al. (2019 ) and Karras
et al. (2020 ) for their open-source code, which we extended.
Finally, the authors would like to thank our anonymous
reviewers for their feedback and Kartik Chandra for his
suggestions while revising.
References
Campos-Taberner, M., Garc ´ıa-Haro, F. J., Mart ´ınez, B.,
Izquierdo-Verdiguier, E., Atzberger, C., Camps-Valls, G.,
and Gilabert, M. A. Understanding deep learning in
land use classiﬁcation based on sentinel-2 time series.
Scientiﬁc Reports , 10(1):17188, Oct 2020. ISSN 2045-
2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74215-5. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-74215-5 .
Cerr´on, B., Bazan, C., and Coronado, A. Detection of hous-
ing and agriculture areas on dry-riverbeds for the evalu-ation of risk by landslides using low-resolution satellite
imagery based on deep learning. Study zone: Lima, Peru.
InICML 2020 Workshop: Tackling Climate Change with
Machine Learning , 2020.
Cordts, M., Omran, M., Ramos, S., Rehfeld, T., Enzweiler,
M., Benenson, R., Franke, U., Roth, S., and Schiele, B.
The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene under-
standing. In Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016.
Dao, D., Rausch, J., and Zhang, C. GeoLabels: Towards
Efﬁcient Ecosystem Monitoring using Data Programming
on Geospatial Information. In NeurIPS 2019 Workshop:
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning , 2019.
Etten, A. V ., Lindenbaum, D., and Bacastow, T. M. Spacenet:
A remote sensing dataset and challenge series, 2019.
Hinton, G. E., Sabour, S., and Frosst, N. Matrix cap-
sules with EM routing. In International Conference
on Learning Representations , 2018. URL https://
openreview.net/forum?id=HJWLfGWRb .
Hoffman, J., Tzeng, E., Park, T., Zhu, J.-Y ., Isola, P., Saenko,
K., Efros, A. A., and Darrell, T. Cycada: Cycle-consistent
adversarial domain adaptation, 2017.
Jaccard, P. The distribution of the ﬂora in the alpine
zone.1. New Phytologist , 11(2):37–50, 1912. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.1912.tb05611.x.
URL https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1469-8137.1912.
tb05611.x .
Karras, T., Aittala, M., Hellsten, J., Laine, S., Lehtinen, J.,
and Aila, T. Training generative adversarial networks
with limited data, 2020.
LaLonde, R. and Bagci, U. Capsules for object segmenta-
tion, 2018.
Lees, T., Tseng, G., Dadson, S., Hern ´andez, A.,
G. Atzberger, C., and Reece, S. A Machine Learning
Pipeline to Predict Vegetation Health. In ICML 2020
Workshop: Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learn-
ing, 2020.Domain Adaptation for Low-Resource GIS ML
M. Bacastow, T., Van Etten, A., and Weir, N. Au-
tomated Feature Extraction Using High Off-Nadir
Satellite Imagery for Humanitarian Assistance and
Disaster Response (HADR). In GTC-DC 2019 ,
2019. URL https://developer.nvidia.com/
gtc-dc/2019/video/dc91263-vid .
McInnes, L., Healy, J., and Melville, J. Umap: Uniform
manifold approximation and projection for dimension
reduction, 2020.
Peng, X., Usman, B., Kaushik, N., Hoffman, J., Wang, D.,
and Saenko, K. Visda: The visual domain adaptation
challenge, 2017.
Richter, S. R., Vineet, V., Roth, S., and Koltun, V. Playing
for data: Ground truth from computer games, 2016.
Sainburg, T., McInnes, L., and Gentner, T. Q. Parametric
umap embeddings for representation and semi-supervised
learning, 2021.
Tsai, Y.-H., Hung, W.-C., Schulter, S., Sohn, K., Yang, M.-
H., and Chandraker, M. Learning to adapt structured
output space for semantic segmentation, 2020.
Vu, T.-H., Jain, H., Bucher, M., Cord, M., and P ´erez, P.
Advent: Adversarial entropy minimization for domain
adaptation in semantic segmentation, 2019.
Xu, J. Z., Lu, W., Li, Z., Khaitan, P., and Zaytseva, V.
Building damage detection in satellite imagery using con-
volutional neural networks, 2019.
Zbontar, J., Jing, L., Misra, I., LeCun, Y., and Deny, S.
Barlow twins: Self-supervised learning via redundancy
reduction, 2021.
Zhang, P., Zhang, B., Zhang, T., Chen, D., Wang, Y., and
Wen, F. Prototypical pseudo label denoising and target
structure learning for domain adaptive semantic segmen-
tation, 2021.
A. Effect of Augmentations on Domain
Adaptation
Early results using augmentations have been promising. For
example, applying the augmentations of Karras et al. (2020 )
with a ﬁxed per-augmentation probability signiﬁcantly im-
proves both source-only and ADVENT performance, and
improves ADVENT’s performance relative to source-only,
as shown in Figure 4and Table 2for Vegas-to-Khartoum
adaptation. It remains to be seen if this effect persists across
different benchmarks for multiple runs and, if so, how it
varies across per-augmentation probabilities.
(a) Input
 (b) Ground Truth
(c) ADVENT
 (d) Augmented ADVENT
Figure 4. Example Vegas-to-Khartoum predictions for (a),
from ADVENT, with and without augmentations (ﬁxed
per-augmentation probability of 0.6).
Table 2. Intersection over Union (IoU) for source-only and AD-
VENT training on Vegas-to-Khartoum adaptation, with and with-
out augmentations (ﬁxed per-augmentation probability of 0.6).
SOURCE -ONLY ADVENT  IOU
NOAUG.1 5 . 0 9 1 3 . 5 9  1.50
AUG.3 3 . 8 1 3 6 . 0 0 +2.19
A.1. Effect of Augmentations on Adversarial and
Source-Only Adaptation
The observed improvement augmentation brings to both
source-only and ADVENT-based adaptation is signiﬁcantly
greater than the relative improvement it confers to ADVENT
over source-only. As these augmentations are comparatively
simple to apply, they represent a reasonable, unobtrusive
starting-point for improving the domain adaptation of rele-
vant supervised tasks in geospatial machine learning.
A.2. Role of Adaptive Augmentation Probability
Though we do not require adaptive augmentation probability
for the reasons described by Karras et al. (2020 ), it remains
of interest whether adaptive probability schedules can prove
more useful during training than ﬁxed probabilities.