Commercial Vehicle Trafﬁc Detection from Satellite Imagery with Deep
Learning
Moritz Blattner1Michael Mommert1Damian Borth1
Abstract
Road freight trafﬁc is a major greenhouse gas
emitter: commercial vehicles (CVs) contribute
7% to the global CO 2emission budget, a frac-
tion that is likely to increase in the future. The
quantitative monitoring of CV trafﬁc rates, while
essential for the implementation of targeted road
emission regulations, is costly and as such only
available in developed regions. In this work, we
investigate the feasibility of estimating hourly
CV trafﬁc rates from freely available Sentinel-
2 satellite imagery. We train a modiﬁed Faster
R-CNN object detection model to detect individ-
ual CVs in satellite images and feed the resulting
counts into a regression model to predict hourly
CV trafﬁc rates. This architecture, when trained
on ground-truth data for Switzerland, is able to
estimate hourly CV trafﬁc rates for any freeway
section within 58% (MAPE) of the actual value;
for freeway sections with historic information on
CV trafﬁc rates, we can predict hourly CV trafﬁc
rates up to within 4% (MAPE). We successfully
apply our model to freeway sections in other coun-
tries and show-case its utility by quantifying the
change in trafﬁc patterns as a result of the ﬁrst
COVID-19 lockdown in Switzerland. Our results
show that it is possible to estimate hourly CV traf-
ﬁc rates from satellite images, which can guide
civil engineers and policy makers, especially in
developing countries, in monitoring and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions from CV trafﬁc.
1. Introduction
Driven by an increasing demand in international parcel ship-
ping through e-commerce and other effects, the annual par-
cel shipping volume passed 100 billion parcels in 2019 and
1Institute of Computer Science, University of St. Gallen,
St. Gallen, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Moritz Blattner
<moritz.blattner@student.unisg.ch >.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at
ICML 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
Figure 1. Observations of moving CVs (green boxes) in Sentinel-2
satellite imagery. The “rainbow”-effect is caused by a temporal
delay between acquiring the individual bands.
is expected to double within the next ﬁve years (Statista,
2020). Road freight, which currently accounts for more than
7% of the annual global CO 2emissions (IEA, 2021; 2019),
will remain the dominant mode of surface freight transporta-
tion (Eurostat, 2018) in the near future, likely leading to
even higher emissions, as carbon-neutral solutions for heavy
modes of transportion have not yet matured (ITF, 2021).
Ground-based trafﬁc measurement systems provide quanti-
tative information on the rate and composition of trafﬁc for
a given location. Such information is required by civil engi-
neers, policy-makers and other stakeholders for road plan-
ning and the implementation of road emission regulations.
Switzerland, with its dense road network, has over 500 of
such systems in operation, which monitor trafﬁc rates 24/7,
while simultaneously categorizing all passing vehicles into
ten different vehicle size classes (Bundesamt f ¨ur Strassen
ASTRA, 2009). However, such a dense ground-based de-
tection system is costly in installation and maintenance and
thus often unavailable in developing countries, where much
of the growth in CV trafﬁc is occurring (Kaack et al., 2018).
The use of remote imaging data, as provided by the Euro-
pean Copernicus Programme and its two Sentinel-2 satel-
lites, may be utilized to estimate hourly CV trafﬁc rates.
CVs and other vehicles are typically too small to be spa-
tially resolved in Sentinel-2 images. However, CVs of a
sufﬁcient size and velocity ( 70km/h) generate a charac-Commercial Vehicle Trafﬁc Detection from Satellite Imagery with Deep Learning
Figure 2. Schematic overview of our pipeline.
teristic pattern due to the temporal offset between different
bands during imaging, which facilitates their detection (see
Figure 1). This work tries to tackle the missing trafﬁc census
in many parts of the world by combining satellite images
with deep learning. The goal is to facilitate a new automated
monitoring technique to quantify CV trafﬁc rates anywhere
in the world.
CV trafﬁc monitoring enables stakeholders to improve road
planning and enforce environmental protection regulations
to monitor and minimize greenhouse gas emissions from
CV trafﬁc, and to identify illegal industrial operations (log-
ging, mining, waste dumps...). Additionally, the data can
be utilized for economic analyses, such as the tracking of
transportion routes.
2. Related Work
Deep learning techniques are compelling in the task of iden-
tifying, localizing and quantifying objects in images. Such
methods have been successfully applied on remote sens-
ing data to identify various buildings and construction sites
(Dandabathula, 2019; Stankov & He, 2014; Mommert et al.,
2021), military facilities (Nur ¨Omero ˘glu et al., 2019), oil
tanks (Zhang et al., 2015), tree crowns (Hung et al., 2012),
smoke plumes (Mommert et al., 2020) and more. The task of
vehicle detection has been approached with high-resolution
imaging data and based on single-stage and two-stage object
detection methods (Zhou et al., 2020; Kaack et al., 2019).
Kaack et al. (2019) went one step further and cross-validated
their model with ground-based trafﬁc count stations to make
a probabilistic prediction of annual average daily CV trafﬁc.
This work combines the use of freely available Sentinel-2
data with a calibration-based approach on actual CV trafﬁc
rate data, making this model globally applicable. The ap-
proach to detect commercial vehicles on Sentinel-2 satellite
images was ﬁrst pursued by Fisser (2020), who utilized a
multi-thresholding model that compares individual pixel
values with predeﬁned thresholds to detect individual CVs
on images.3. Data and Methodology
3.1. Freeway Location Selection
We identify a total of 33 freeway sections in Switzerland
that are suitable for our approach by meeting the following
criteria: (1) the distance between two successive entry or
exit points is sufﬁciently long and (2) the freeway section
in question must be equipped with a trafﬁc measurement
system (Bundesamt f ¨ur Strassen ASTRA, 2009) to provide
trafﬁc rate ground-truth data. The selection of freeway
sections mirrors the different geographical characteristics
within the country. The resulting freeway sections have
visible lengths varying between one to more than 10 km;
short lengths are sometimes caused by tunnel elements.
3.2. Satellite Image Data
For each freeway section, we download satellite images
from ESA’s Sentinel-2 satellites taken over the years 2019
and 2020, resulting in 3,670 images. Constrained by the
satellites’ orbits, observations typically are obtained around
noon local time with spacings of at least 5 days. We only
utilize those Sentinel-2 bands with 10 m resolution to be
able to identify CVs against the background (bands 2, 3, 4
and 8). We split each multi-band image into tiles of 100 px
100 px roughly centered on the freeway utilizing a road
mask. We annotate all visible CVs on the freeway with
rectangular bounding boxes (Tkachenko et al., 2020-2021).
The created dataset consists of 5,683 labeled images with
4,686 annotations (individual CVs). Around one third of the
images contain CVs, while two thirds show empty roads or
cloudy images.
3.3. Trafﬁc Count Data
We obtain ground-truth trafﬁc data from the federal road of-
ﬁce in Switzerland (Bundesamt f ¨ur Strassen ASTRA, 2020).
The data consist of hourly trafﬁc rates and distinguish be-
tween ten different vehicle categories. Across the selected
33 freeway sections, we have strongly frequented ones with
well above 5,000 CVs and buses a day, whereas smaller
sections only count few hundreds. We utilize ground-data
with the goal to convert CV counts in a single image to an
estimate for the hourly CV trafﬁc rate.Commercial Vehicle Trafﬁc Detection from Satellite Imagery with Deep Learning
3.4. CV Detection
As object detection model, we use a Faster R-CNN ar-
chitecture (Ren et al., 2015) with a ResNet-50 (He et al.,
2016) backbone for feature extraction, similar to Kaack et al.
(2019). The network is implemented using PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019). We adjust image scaling parameters and adapt
the anchor box sizes to match the size of the CVs in the
images, which only cover a few pixels. We tested different
image upscaling values to counteract the down-sampling
ratio of the ResNet-50. We ran 49 randomized hyperpa-
rameter searches to deﬁne the optimal batch size, learning
rate, weight decay and momentum. Random image mirror-
ing, ﬂipping, and rotations by integer multiples of 90are
utilized as data augmentations. As evaluation metrics, we
utilize precision, recall and mean average precision (mAP,
for Intersection-over-Union, IoU, thresholds of 0.1, 0.3 and
0.5). We train the network for 400 epochs on one NVIDIA
Tesla V100-SXM2. The main result of the object detection
model is a count of CV instances in each image, serving as
a snapshot count from which trafﬁc rates are extrapolated.
3.5. CV Trafﬁc Rate Regression
For the trafﬁc rate estimation from CV counts as provided by
the object detection model, we utilize the gradient-boosted
tree-based implementation CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al.,
2018). We enrich the detected CV count with observation
speciﬁc features, i.e. the weekday and the percentage of the
freeway area that is covered by clouds at sensing time. We
also include section-speciﬁc features, such as the number of
lanes, distance to next largest city and more, however, these
features did not improve the results and were discarded.
We train the model in a global and a local setting. In the
global setting we used 70% of the freeway sections as train-
ing data and 30% for testing; data from each freeway section
is only used in either of the samples, but not both. In the
local setting we train one model per freeway section and
used the same split for the observations per station. The
intuition behind these settings is that the global setting ap-
plies to unknown freeway sections, whereas the local setting
simulates a freeway section for which historic trafﬁc rate
information is available, which can be learned by the model.
We train the CatBoost model with the objective to minimize
the root mean square error (RMSE); we utilize a maximum
number of leaves of 64 and a maximum tree depth of 6. We
evaluate the results with the mean absolute error (MAE),
RMSE and the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE).
Table 1. Object detection model test set results.
ModelAP @IoU Levels
AP@0.1 AP@0.3 AP@0.5
Faster RCNN 0.711 0.697 0.641
Faster RCNN + data augmentation 0.723 0.703 0.650
(a) True positives
 (b) True negatives
(c) False negative
 (d) False positive
Figure 3. Example predictions from our object detection model.
Green boxes correspond to ground-truth labels, red boxes corre-
spond to model predictions.
4. Results
4.1. CV Detection
Figure 3 shows example images and corresponding model
predictions for bounding boxes around CVs from our trained
model. Table 1 lists the AP for the model trained with and
without data augmentations for different IoU thresholds. We
see that the model trained with data augmentation slightly
outperforms the model without those augmentations. Fur-
thermore, AP peaks for an IoU threshold of 0.1, resulting in
recall and precision metrics of 0.7 each, as evaluated on our
test data set.
4.2. CV Trafﬁc Rate Regression
We test the regression model performance using both the
global and local settings on our test data set and receive
the results labeled as “baseline” in Table 2. Upon inspec-
tion of the results, we found systematic prediction outliers
that were due to (1) extremely short freeway sections or (2)
non-negligible cloud coverage over the freeway, or both. By
ﬁltering freeway sections with lengths 1 km and cloud
coverage 20%, we are able to achieve signiﬁcantly bet-
ter performances (labeled “global” and “local” in Table 2),
which we adopt as our ﬁnal regression models.
Figure 4 illustrates the residual errors between the actual and
predicted values for both models. We can see in the global
model, that observations with low trafﬁc density tend to
be overestimated, while observations with high frequencies
are underestimated. Furthermore, we can see that clusters
are formed. In the case of the local model, which has seenCommercial Vehicle Trafﬁc Detection from Satellite Imagery with Deep Learning
Table 2. Trafﬁc rate prediction results.
Setting R2MAE RMSE MAPE
Global baseline 0.46 123 180 0.84
Global 0.65 102 162 0.58
Local baseline 0.93 34 66 0.09
Local 0.95 33 60 0.04
(“historic”) CV trafﬁc rates for the speciﬁc freeway section,
the model utilizes learned trafﬁc rate means to arrange these
clusters on the unity line, which drastically reduces the
variance of the predictions.
Figure 4. Actual vs. predicted regression results in global and local
setting.
5. Discussion
Our object detection approach to identifying CVs in
Sentinel-2 image data leads to robust detections, resulting in
precision and recall scores of 0.7 each. To put these results
in context, we compare our results to results obtained by the
multi-thresholding model developed by Fisser (2020) on the
same data set. Results are summarized in Table 3, revealing
that our model performs signiﬁcantly better. Speciﬁcally,
we found the Fisser (2020) model to be susceptible to con-
fusing clouds as CVs and to be less robust with respect to
different geographical characteristics.
Theregression model in the global setting achieves reason-
able results, while the model in the local setting performs
much better. For the local model to be applicable, historic
ground-truth trafﬁc rates are required to guide the model
to learn average trafﬁc rates for the corresponding freeway
section. This behavior is represented well in Figure 4.
5.1. CV Detection: Domain Shift
We test our CV detection approach on different geograph-
ical areas, featuring different vegetation and soil types, by
randomly selecting freeway sections across ﬁve countries
(Brazil, US, China, Germany and Brazil) on ﬁve different
continents. For the former two, we select dense forest areasTable 3. Benchmarking of our model compared to other work.
Fisser (2020) Our model
# of predictions 329 435
TP / FP / FN 162 / 167 / 219 344 / 91 / 37
Precision 0.49 0.79
Recall 0.43 0.90
and for the latter three, we select arid environments. Pre-
cision and recall metrics based on manual annotations for
these images, are almost identical to those for our original
test data set (Section 4.1) and consistent throughout this
sample.
5.2. CV Trafﬁc Rates: Impact of COVID-19 Lockdown
We analyze the inﬂuence of COVID-19 lockdown measures
on CV trafﬁc rates during the ﬁrst infection wave in Switzer-
land with a focus on freeway sections in border proximity,
as they were predominantly affected. Figure 5 shows the
reduction seen over all border areas. Following columns
break down the effect for individual stations. We see that
the border to Italy (Moleno) was strongly affected, followed
by the border to France (Nyon). The border to Germany
(Basel) was barely affected by the lockdown measures. In
general, our CV trafﬁc rate predictions agree well with the
ground-truth measurements.
Figure 5. Relative change in CV trafﬁc rates in Swiss border re-
gions during the ﬁrst COVID-19 lockdown.
6. Conclusions
This work presents an approach to detect CVs and estimate
CV trafﬁc rates from Sentinel-2 satellite images. We show
that it is possible to measure hourly CV trafﬁc rates for
any freeway section with a MAPE of 58% of the true value
or with a RMSE of 160 vehicles per hour. For freeway
sections with historic CV trafﬁc rate data, we can predict
CV trafﬁc volumes with an RMSE of 60 vehicles per hour
or within a MAPE of 4%. Our model pipeline is suitable
to estimate CV trafﬁc rates to support civil engineers and
policymakers globally to monitor greenhouse gas emissions.Commercial Vehicle Trafﬁc Detection from Satellite Imagery with Deep Learning
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the Copernicus Pro-
gramme and the Swiss Bundesamt f ¨ur Strassen for providing
the data utilized in this study.
References
Bundesamt f ¨ur Strassen ASTRA. Richtlinie Verkehrsz ¨ahler.
ASTRA 13012 , 1.06:1–24, 2009.
Bundesamt f ¨ur Strassen ASTRA. Schweizerische automa-
tische Strassenverkehrsz ¨ahlung (SASVZ), 2020. URL
https://www.astra.admin.ch/astra/de/
home/dokumentation/daten-information
sprodukte/verkehrsdaten/daten-publik
ationen/automatische-strassenverkehr
szaehlung.html . Accessed on 2020-11-10.
Dandabathula, G. Automatic Detection of Overhead Wa-
ter Tanks From Satellite Images Using Faster-Rcnn. In-
ternational Journal of Advanced Research in Computer
Science , 10:34–37, 2019.
Eurostat. Energy, transport and environment indicators.
Technical report, European Union, 2018.
Fisser, H. Truck Detection Sentinel2 Upscaling, 2020. URL
https://github.com/hfisser/Truck Det
ection Sentinel2 COVID19 . Accessed on 2020-
10-30.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual
learning for image recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pp. 770–778, 2016.
Hung, C., Bryson, M., and Sukkarieh, S. Multi-class predic-
tive template for tree crown detection. Isprs Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 68:170–183, 2012.
IEA. Transport sector CO2 emissions by mode in the Sus-
tainable Development Scenario, 2000-2030, 2019. URL
https://www.iea.org/data-and-statist
ics/charts/transport-sector-co2-emis
sions-by-mode-in-the-sustainable-dev
elopment-scenario-2000-2030 . Accessed on
2021-05-20.
IEA. Global Energy Review: CO2 Emissions in 2020, 2021.
URL https://www.iea.org/articles/glo
bal-energy-review-co2-emissions-in-2
020. Accessed on 2021-05-20.
ITF. ITF Transport Outlook 2021. OECD Publishing , pp.
167–168, Chapter 5, 2021.Kaack, L., Chen, G. H., and Morgan, M. G. Truck trafﬁc
monitoring with satellite images. Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable
Societies , 2019.
Kaack, L. H., Vaishnav, P., Morgan, M. G., Azevedo, I., and
Rai, S. Decarbonizing intraregional freight systems with
a focus on modal shift. Environmental Research Letters ,
13(8), 2018.
Mommert, M., Sigel, M., Neuhausler, M., Scheibenreif,
L., and Borth, D. Characterization of Industrial Smoke
Plumes from Remote Sensing Data. ArXiv , 2020. ISSN
23318422.
Mommert, M., Scheibenreif, L., Hanna, J., and Borth, D.
IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Sym-
posium 2021, accepted for publication, 2021.
Nur ¨Omero ˘glu, A., Kumbasar, N., Argun Oral, E., and
Ozbek, I. Y . Hangar Detection from Satellite Images with
Mask-RCNN and YOLOv2 Algorithms. 27th Signal Pro-
cessing and Communications Applications Conference
(SIU) , 2019.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J.,
Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga,
L., Desmaison, A., K ¨opf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Rai-
son, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang,
L., Bai, J., and Chintala, S. Pytorch: An imperative
style, high-performance deep learning library. In NeurIPS ,
2019.
Prokhorenkova, L., Gusev, G., V orobev, A., Dorogush, A. V .,
and Gulin, A. CatBoost: unbiased boosting with cat-
egorical features. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems . Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., and Sun, J. Faster R-CNN:
Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Pro-
posal Networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , 39:1137–1149, 2015.
Stankov, K. and He, D. Detection of Buildings in Mul-
tispectral Very High Spatial Resolution Images Using
the Percentage Occupancy Hit-or-Miss Transform. IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations
and Remote Sensing , 7(10):4069–4080, 2014.
Statista. Global parcel shipping volume between 2013 and
2026 (in billion parcels), 2020. URL https://www.
statista.com/statistics/1139910/parc
el-shipping-volume-worldwide/ . Accessed
on 2021-05-20.
Tkachenko, M., Malyuk, M., Shevchenko, N., Holmanyuk,
A., and Liubimov, N. Label Studio: Data labeling soft-
ware, 2020-2021. URL https://github.com/hCommercial Vehicle Trafﬁc Detection from Satellite Imagery with Deep Learning
eartexlabs/label-studio . Open source soft-
ware available from https://github.com/heartexlabs/label-
studio.
Zhang, L., Shi, Z., and Wu, J. A Hierarchical Oil Tank
Detector With Deep Surrounding Features for High-
Resolution Optical Satellite Imagery. IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Re-
mote Sensing , 8(10):4895–4909, 2015.
Zhou, L., Liu, J., and Chen, L. Vehicle detection based on
remote sensing image of Yolov3. 2020 IEEE 4th Informa-
tion Technology, Networking, Electronic and Automation
Control Conference (ITNEC) , 1:468–472, 2020.