Machine Learning-based Predictive Maintenance for Renewable Energy:
The Case of Power Plants in Morocco
Loubna Benabbou1Zouheir Malki2Kris Sankaran3Hicham Bouzekri4
1. Context
The production of energy currently accounts for 40% of
global Greenhouse Gas (GhG) emissions, and the conse-
quences of global warming are already being felt: extreme
and severe weather, melting ice, wildlife extinction, and
higher sea level. In order to keep the rise in global tempera-
tures below 2C (Paris Agreement), the share of renewables
must reach 65% of the worlds primary energy supply by
2050, up from 15% today. Thus, energy sector is placed at
the heart of climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts
(1;2). During the last decade, renewable technologies have
seen considerable advances, and solar and wind energy have
had dramatic growth trajectories. This is manifested by the
large deployment of renewables. At the end of 2018, the
global cumulative renewable installed capacity is 2.5 TW
with an annual growth rate of 8% ( 1). The cost of energy
continues its decline, accelerated by technological progress,
and this trend is projected to continue. In fact, the weighted
Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE) of solar photovoltaic at
utility-scale has reached USD 50 per MWh in 2017, down
from USD 180 per MWh in 2009 ( 3). Arguably, renewables
represent the most economical solution for new capacity in
a growing number of countries and regions. Despite this
success, there is still some way to go to ensure better pene-
tration of renewables into an energy market mostly based
on fossil fuels. To this end, it is important to continue on
the path of cost reduction whether in capital (Capex) or
operating (Opex) expenditures.
In this project, the focus will be on the reduction of the
overall electricity cost by the reduction of operating expen-
ditures, including maintenance costs. We propose a predic-
tive maintenance (PdM) framework for multi-component
systems in renewables power plants based on machine learn-
ing (ML) and optimization approaches. This project would
beneﬁt from a real database acquired from the Moroccan
*Equal contribution1Universite du Quebec a Rimouski
2Polytechnique Montreal3Mila4Moroccan Agency Of Sus-
tainable Energy. Correspondence to: Loubna Benabbou
<Loubna benabbou@uqar.ca >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, CA, USA, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the
author(s).Agency Of Sustainable Energy (MASEN) that own and op-
erate several wind, solar and hydro power plants spread over
Moroccan territory. Morocco has launched an ambitious
energy strategy since 2009 that aims to ensure the energy
security of the country, diversify the source of energy and
preserve the environment. Ultimately, Morocco has set the
target of 52% of renewables by 2030 with a large capital
investment of USD 30 billion ( 4). To this end, Morocco will
install 10 GW allocated as follows: 45% for solar, 42% for
wind and 13% for hydro, avoiding the emission of approxi-
mately 21 millions tonnes of CO2. Through the commitment
of many actors, in particular in Research and Development,
Morocco intends to become a regional leader and a model to
follow in its climate change efforts. MASEN is investing in
several strategies to reduce the cost of renewables, including
the cost of operations and maintenance. Our project will
provide a ML predictive maintenance framework to support
these efforts.
2. Predictive maintenance process
PdM aims to predict when system failure might occur, and
to prevent the occurrence of failure by performing mainte-
nance. It allows the maintenance frequency to be as low
as possible to prevent unplanned corrective maintenance,
without incurring costs associated with doing too much sys-
tematic preventive maintenance ( 5;6). Experts agree PdM
could reduce maintenance cost by 10% to 40% ( 7). It also
improves the availability, the reliability, and the security of
critical components.
System structures become more and more complex with
a large number of components and very complex interac-
tions between them. Wind turbines are a good example
of complex systems. They are composed of several criti-
cal components such as the blades, the pitch, the gearbox
and the generator and they present impressive characteris-
tics such as the hub height, rotor diameter or rated power.
They normally run on a 24/7 schedule, are geographically
distributed and operating under arduous conditions. Each
unexpected failure can lead to a drop in availability and
huge ﬁnancial losses. Therefore, they are ideal candidates
for savings through PdM.
According to International Standard ISO 13381- 1 ( 5), PdMML-based Predictive Maintenance
process can be divided into three different steps, namely:
(i) Diagnostics, (ii) Prognostics and (iii) Decision Making.
Diagnostics involves fault detection, isolation (which com-
ponent is failed), failure mode identiﬁcation (what is the
cause of failure) and degradation level assessment (quantiﬁ-
cation of failure severity). The prognostics task consists of
determining the Remaining Useful Life (RUL). The RUL is
the lead-time to failure and a good RUL prediction accuracy
is critically important since it has impacts on the planning of
maintenance activities, spare parts logistic and operational
performance. Decision making is a process resulting in the
selection of right maintenance actions among several alter-
natives. The maintenance decision maker must evaluate the
each action based on the diagnostics or prognostics results
and he should be able to estimate the outcomes of each
alternative (8; 6; 9).
3. ML predictive maintenance framework for
multi-components system
We believe ML can provide a large improvement to all steps
of PdM process: (i) ML failure detection models, (ii) ML
failure identiﬁcation models, (iii) ML system components
prioritisation models, (iv) ML RUL prediction models and
(v) Maintenance policy optimization models. Several ML
algorithms have been applied in PdM: Vector Support Ma-
chines ( 10) Decision Trees ( 11) Random forest ( 12). More
recently, the emergence of deep learning algorithms has
given rise to new applications in PdM (13; 14; 15; 16; 17).
Our PdM model for multi-components system, based on
ML and optimization, consist of four key steps: (i) Data
Acquisition and Processing (ii) Failure Detection (iii) RUL
Prediction and (iv) Maintenance Policy optimization.
1.Data Acquisition and Processing. Data are collected
through a set of sensors using various technologies
(e.g: vibration, oil analysis, sound, thermography and
tribology). A particular attention will be paid to the
preparation, processing and analysis of the data for a
better understanding of the multi-component system
and to eliminate errors that might affect the interpreta-
tion of degradation phenomena.
2.Failure Detection. The ﬁrst level of detection is to
distinguish between two classes: failure and no-failure.
Based on the assessment of any deviation between
normal and abnormal behavior, one can also evaluate
the severity of the failure. This step allows isolating
and identifying the component that stopped functioning
(from effects to causes).
3.RUL Prediction. This step aims to predict the RUL
(from causes to effects). RUL prediction models have
drawn great attention over the last decades and theycan be categorized into four main groups ( 18;5): (i)
Knowledge-based models (ii) Life expectancy models
(iii) Data-based models and (iv) Physical models. How-
ever, the use of these models in predictive maintenance
decision process for multi-component systems is still
an under investigated area but also an open challenge.
In our framework, RUL prediction represents an even
more advanced step. The consideration of predicting
RUL problem as a time-series prediction and the avail-
ability of large-scale datasets is a strong incentive to
seek deep learning algorithms in general and LSTM
in particular. Impressive progress has been made in
a variety of application of LSTM in RUL prediction
(13).
4.Maintenance Policy Optimization. Based on the
RUL prediction of each system component, one can
evaluate locally the outcome of the maintenance at
component level (generally in terms of cost and avail-
ability). In real life, systems (such as wind turbines) are
composed of several critical components. So the aim
of our model is to propose an optimal and a global PdM
policy at the system level by considering the existence
of numerous dependant components.
References
[1]International Renewable Energy Agency [IRENA]. Re-
newable capacity statistics 2018.
[2]IPCC Special Report. Global warming of 1.5C. Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC reports,
Switzerland, 2018.
[3]Lazard. Lazards levelized cost of energy analysis–
version 12.0, 2018.
[4]Masen. Moroccan agency of sustainable energy re-
ports, 2018.
[5]JZ Sikorska, Melinda Hodkiewicz, and Lin Ma. Prog-
nostic modelling options for remaining useful life es-
timation by industry. Mechanical systems and signal
processing , 25(5):1803–1836, 2011.
[6]Nam-Ho Kim, Dawn An, and Joo-Ho Choi. Prognos-
tics and health management of engineering systems.
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing , 2017.
[7]Mckinsey Global Institute. The internet of things:
Mapping the value beyond the hype, 2015.
[8]Michael Pecht and Myeongsu Kang. Prognostics and
Health Management of Electronics: Fundamentals,
Machine Learning, and the Internet of Things . John
Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2018.ML-based Predictive Maintenance
[9]Andrew Kusiak and Wenyan Li. The prediction and
diagnosis of wind turbine faults. Renewable energy ,
36(1):16–23, 2011.
[10] P. Konar and P. Chattopadhyay. Bearing fault detection
of induction motor using wavelet and support vector
machines (svms). Appl. Soft Comput. , 11(6), Septem-
ber 2011.
[11] V . Muralidharan and V . Sugumaran. Feature extraction
using wavelets and classiﬁcation through decision tree
algorithm for fault diagnosis of mono-block centrifu-
gal pump. Measurement , 46(1), 2013.
[12] Di X. Yang, B. and T. Han. Random forests classiﬁer
for machine fault diagnosis. J. Mech. Sci. Technol , 22,
2008.
[13] Rui Zhao, Ruqiang Yan, Zhenghua Chen, Kezhi Mao,
Peng Wang, and Robert X Gao. Deep learning and
its applications to machine health monitoring. Me-
chanical Systems and Signal Processing , 115:213–237,
2019.
[14] Abbaspour-Fard MH. Rohani, A. and S. Abdolahpour.
Prediction of tractor repair and maintenance costs us-
ing artiﬁcial neural network. Expert Systems with
Applicationsh , 38(7), 2011.
[15] Shi-D. Chen J. Zhu L. Xiong, G. and X. Duan. Divi-
sional fault diagnosis of large-scale power systems
based on radial basis function neural network and
fuzzy integral. Electric Power Systems Research , 105,
2013.
[16] Wu-Y . Yuan, M. and L. Lin. Fault diagnosis and re-
maining useful life estimation of aero engine using
lstm neural network. 2016.
[17] Wei Zhang, Gaoliang Peng, Chuanhao Li, Yuanhang
Chen, and Zhujun Zhang. A new deep learning model
for fault diagnosis with good anti-noise and domain
adaptation ability on raw vibration signals. In Sensors ,
2017.
[18] Andrew KS Jardine, Daming Lin, and Dragan Banje-
vic. A review on machinery diagnostics and prognos-
tics implementing condition-based maintenance. Me-
chanical systems and signal processing , 20(7):1483–
1510, 2006.