Learning representations to predict landslide occurrences and detect illegal
mining across multiple domains
Aneesh Rangnekar1Matthew Hoffman1 2
Abstract
Modelling landslide occurrences is challenging
due to lack of valuable prior information on the
trigger. Satellites can provide crucial insights for
identifying landslide activity and characterizing
patterns spatially and temporally. We propose to
analyze remote sensing data from affected regions
using deep learning methods, ﬁnd correlation in
the changes over time, and predict future land-
slide occurrences and their potential causes. The
learned networks can then be applied to generate
task-speciﬁc imagery, including but not limited to,
illegal mining detection and disaster relief mod-
elling.
1. Introduction
Landslides occur throughout the world and are caused by a
range of factors, including natural: earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, heavy rainfalls, man-made: deforestation, dam
constructions, and illegal mining (we refer the reader to
(Gariano & Guzzetti, 2016; Lewkowicz & Way, 2019) for
relevant literature). Fig. 1 shows one such location in the
village of Malin, located in Pune (Maharashtra, India). This
landslide was classiﬁed as occurred due to heavy rainfall ,
although there are other possible factors that may have led
to the eventual slide: (1) deforestation, (2) agriculture, (3)
mining, and (4) the construction of a dam in the area. These
factors tend to have a long term effect of on soil forma-
tion and properties. For example, deforestation is a major
contributor to climate change due to the removal of natural
carbon sink, but it is equally responsible for loss of root
structures that ﬁrmly hold the soil. We propose to lever-
age the data available from affected landslide(s) locations
1Chester F. Carlson Center for Imaging Science, Rochester
Institute of Technology, Rochester, USA2School of Math-
ematical Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology,
Rochester, USA. Correspondence to: Aneesh Rangnekar
<aneesh.rangnekar@mail.rit.edu >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
(a) (b) (c) (d)Figure 1. The overlooking scene of 2014 Malin landslide area in
India from the Landsat 8 satellite. (a) denotes the area marked for
capture by a green box, (b) corresponding imagery on 12/14/2013,
(c) on 6/8/2014; few days before the landslide, and (d) on 1/8/2015.
We display the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI)
which measures the amount of vegetation in a given scene (higher
is better). As observed, (c) has signiﬁcantly less vegetation as
compared to (b), which may have resulted in the soil underneath
to lose its formation and ultimately lead to a landslide under heavy
rainfall conditions. Our idea aims at using these sort of cues to
predict potential landslide occurrences in the future.
to study the underlying changes and predict potential fu-
ture events based on similarity in patterns. Furthermore,
by knowing the probable causes and effect, we propose to
use conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs) to
model what an area would look like under certain conditions.
For example, if there is suspicion of illegal mining in a re-
gion, a network that has been trained to look for variations
due to natural and human activities can infer what the com-
position would look like post mining. This information can
be used to more easily detect and halt the activity. Similarly,
we can infer the best possible locations to plant trees and
mitigate soil erosion through reforestation efforts. At this
stage, we consider gathering data from six main causes of
landslide occurrences—volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, de-
forestation, heavy rainfall, mining, and construction—and
one positive sample—thriving forest ecosystem.
2. Related Works
For the scope of this paper, we brieﬂy review previous land-
slide detection approaches and relevant deep learning archi-
tectures.
Literature review. Landslide modelling and detection has
been a topic of interest, primarily concerned with mappingLearning representations to predict landslide occurrences
regional landslide susceptibility (Dou et al., 2019a; Kang
et al., 2019; Dou et al., 2019b; Meena et al., 2019; Ghor-
banzadeh et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2018; Shirzadi et al.,
2018; Uemoto et al., 2019). All of the existing work uses
different machine learning approaches on highly region-
localized data and speciﬁc imaging platforms. For example,
Uemoto et al. processed synthetic aperture radar (SAR) data
from the 2016 Kumamoto earthquake (Japan) for generat-
ing amplitude and height difference maps which they later
fused for performing landslide detection. Ghorbanzadeh
et al. compared different machine learning approaches (e.g.
random forests) for landslide detection by combining op-
tical data from the Rapid Eye satellite and topographic in-
formation at Rasuwa district (Nepal). To the best of our
knowledge, no one has yet combined data from various loca-
tions and created a common model that is location-agnostic
and can be used to predict future occurrences. Inspired by
ExtremeWeather (Racah et al., 2017), one piece of this idea
is to gather a global dataset spanning multiple domains of
satellite imagery to facilitate large-scale learning.
Model architectures. We derive our inspiration for this
project from cGANs (Isola et al., 2017), variational autoen-
coders (V AE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013), Augmented Cy-
cleGAN (Almahairi et al., 2018), and MUNIT (Huang et al.,
2018), which all learn mappings between either the same
domain or different domains for generating new imagery.
3. Idea
We propose to develop a framework to identify temporal
patterns that can lead to robust predictions over a hetero-
geneous set of locations around the world. Formally, we
seek to answer the question: Given a model that has seen
variations across America and China, can it generalize to
an unseen formation in India? What are the limitations and
how can we overcome them?
Within this framework, we seek to collectively train an en-
semble of networks on different image domains. To start,
we propose the use of Landsat 8 and SAR-equipped satellite
(e.g. Sentinel 1) data, combined with position metadata.
Each of these data sources has its own set of advantages
and limitations. For example, Landsat 8 cannot see through
clouds, but Sentinel 1 is easily able to see through clouds,
haze, and darkness. Position metadata is required for the
network to get an idea of the location and weather condi-
tions for the images it is processing. Christie et al. (2018)
found that appending an LSTM-converted (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997) metadata feature vector to the image
vector helped in classifying aerial images at varying loca-
tions. We propose to adapt a similar approach for generating
relevant embeddings.
In this paper, we propose to model three sets of networks
LSFigure A Figure B
Task: Deforestation, 
Illegal Mining, ..
Metadata: location 
= China, ..
LSFigure A
Task: Illegal Mining
Metadata: location 
= India(a)
(b)
Figure 
B1.. BNFigure A, B, 
C, …Figure A’, B’, 
C’, …
Figure A1..t
Metadata1..t
Confidence(c)
(d)
Probable Cause(s)Figure 2. The proposed frameworks in brief; (a) V AE to capture
image variations in a latent space encoding without metadata sup-
port, (b) Spatio-temporal network that takes in past t-frames and
metadata information to predict the probability of landslide occur-
rence, (c) and (d) training and testing cGANs that generate future
frames to assess damage by varying appropriate parameters.
(Fig. 2):
VAE: As an initial proof of concept to observe if latent
encoding can capture variety in distribution as a func-
tion of parameters like location and weather conditions.
This helps to understand how difﬁcult it is will be to
create an overall network modelled across images from
all over the globe.
Predictor: A spatio-temporal network with attention
to observe past t-frames and predict landslide occur-
rence along with a conﬁdence score. The attention
module is required for the network to learn to ignore
imagery that has high cloud density in Landsat 8 do-
main as it does not contain valuable information. The
network also outputs a distribution over probable land-
slide causes for pre-disaster management.
cGAN: To generate future possible outcomes for a
given scenario that includes a variety of tasks (e.g.
model movement to assess damage quantity in a given
region and begin relocation). This is currently based on
a single image but can be extended to include a series of
images, or even trained in a multitask fashion alongside
landslide prediction. The task itself is encoded into the
network using a latent-space distribution which can be
later varied to generate multiple outcomes.
4. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose to build a novel large scale dataset
of landslide affected areas for purpose of observing correla-
tions between different regions across the globe. The main
goal is to develop a location-agnostic network for predict-
ing the likelihood of a landslide occurring and its probably
cause. We will also investigate whether it is possible toLearning representations to predict landslide occurrences
detect illegal mining by having the network sample a suite
of possible post-mining scenarios and comparing them with
the imagery at hand. Lastly, we will also explore the po-
tential application of the same trained network to predict
disaster relief by modelling the extent of damage caused by
a landslide event.
References
Almahairi, A., Rajeswar, S., Sordoni, A., Bachman, P., and
Courville, A. Augmented cyclegan: Learning many-
to-many mappings from unpaired data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.10151 , 2018.
Christie, G., Fendley, N., Wilson, J., and Mukherjee, R.
Functional map of the world. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pp. 6172–6180, 2018.
Dou, J., Yunus, A. P., Bui, D. T., Merghadi, A., Sahana,
M., Zhu, Z., Chen, C.-W., Khosravi, K., Yang, Y ., and
Pham, B. T. Assessment of advanced random forest and
decision tree algorithms for modeling rainfall-induced
landslide susceptibility in the izu-oshima volcanic island,
japan. Science of the Total Environment , 662:332–346,
2019a.
Dou, J., Yunus, A. P., Tien Bui, D., Sahana, M., Chen,
C.-W., Zhu, Z., Wang, W., and Pham, B. T. Evaluating
gis-based multiple statistical models and data mining for
earthquake and rainfall-induced landslide susceptibility
using the lidar dem. Remote Sensing , 11(6):638, 2019b.
Gariano, S. L. and Guzzetti, F. Landslides in a changing
climate. Earth-Science Reviews , 162:227–252, 2016.
Ghorbanzadeh, O., Blaschke, T., Gholamnia, K., Meena,
S. R., Tiede, D., and Aryal, J. Evaluation of different ma-
chine learning methods and deep-learning convolutional
neural networks for landslide detection. Remote Sensing ,
11(2):196, 2019.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory.
Neural computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
Huang, X., Liu, M.-Y ., Belongie, S., and Kautz, J. Multi-
modal unsupervised image-to-image translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV) , pp. 172–189, 2018.
Isola, P., Zhu, J.-Y ., Zhou, T., and Efros, A. A. Image-to-
image translation with conditional adversarial networks.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition , pp. 1125–1134, 2017.
Kang, K., Ponomarev, A., Zerkal, O., Huang, S., and Lin,
Q. Shallow landslide susceptibility mapping in sochiski-jump area using gis and numerical modelling. IS-
PRS International Journal of Geo-Information , 8(3):148,
2019.
Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational
bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013.
Lewkowicz, A. G. and Way, R. G. Extremes of summer
climate trigger thousands of thermokarst landslides in a
high arctic environment. Nature communications , 10(1):
1329, 2019.
Meena, S. R., Mishra, B. K., and Tavakkoli Piralilou, S. A
hybrid spatial multi-criteria evaluation method for map-
ping landslide susceptible areas in kullu valley, himalayas.
Geosciences , 9(4):156, 2019.
Racah, E., Beckham, C., Maharaj, T., Kahou, S. E., Prabhat,
M., and Pal, C. Extremeweather: A large-scale climate
dataset for semi-supervised detection, localization, and
understanding of extreme weather events. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 3402–3413,
2017.
Shirzadi, A., Soliamani, K., Habibnejhad, M., Kavian,
A., Chapi, K., Shahabi, H., Chen, W., Khosravi, K.,
Thai Pham, B., Pradhan, B., et al. Novel gis based ma-
chine learning algorithms for shallow landslide suscepti-
bility mapping. Sensors , 18(11):3777, 2018.
Uemoto, J., Moriyama, T., Nadai, A., Kojima, S., and Ume-
hara, T. Landslide detection based on height and ampli-
tude differences using pre-and post-event airborne x-band
sar data. Natural Hazards , pp. 1–19, 2019.
Xiao, L., Zhang, Y ., and Peng, G. Landslide susceptibil-
ity assessment using integrated deep learning algorithm
along the china-nepal highway. Sensors , 18(12):4436,
2018.