Learning Radiative Transfer Models for Climate Change Applications in
Imaging Spectroscopy
Shubhankar Deshpande1Brian D. Bue2David R. Thompson2Vijay Natraj2Mario Parente3
Abstract
According to a recent investigation, an estimated
33-50% of the world’s coral reefs have under-
gone degradation, believed to be as a result of
climate change (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018). A
strong driver of climate change and the subse-
quent environmental impact are greenhouse gases
such as methane. However, the exact relation
climate change has to the environmental condi-
tion cannot be easily established. Remote sens-
ing methods are increasingly being used to quan-
tify and draw connections between rapidly chang-
ing climatic conditions and environmental im-
pact. A crucial part of this analysis is processing
spectroscopy data using radiative transfer mod-
els (RTMs) which is a computationally expensive
process, and limits their use with high volume
imaging spectrometers. This work presents an al-
gorithm that can efﬁciently emulate RTMs using
neural networks leading to a multifold speedup
in processing time, and yielding multiple down-
stream beneﬁts.
1. Introduction
Acquatic ecosystems such as coral reefs, kelp beds, seagrass
and wetlands serve key roles to sustain the coastal marine
populations. They serve as major sites of nutrient cycling,
transport, and carbon storage. They occupy only 0.1% area
of the ocean, but they are massive reservoirs of biodiversity
(Roberts et al., 2002; Bruckner, 2002) and provide shelter
to and support over 25% of all marine species on the planet
(WWF). However the balance within these coastal ecosys-
tems is fragile, and is being increasingly threatened due to
1The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pitts-
burgh, PA, USA2Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA3University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Shubhankar Deshpande
<shubhand@cs.cmu.edu >.
Proceedings of the 35thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).climate change (Eakin et al., 2010; Nicholls et al., 2007)
Among these include dangers such as ocean acidiﬁcation,
industrial runoff, and overﬁshing (Hoegh-Guldberg et al.,
2007). While these stressors are evident while analyzing ef-
fects on a local scale, the data is insufﬁcient to characterize
global scale effects. A large contributor to these stressors
is Methane, which is a powerful greenhouse gas that is
strongly linked with other trace gases as the cause of global
warming, and is the focus of numerous air quality and public
health policies (Duren et al., 2017). Many current methane
monitoring methods are limited to regional or coarser scale
resolution and often cannot detect individual sources. This
is a gap that remote sensing1based techniques have success-
fully been able to bridge (Hochberg et al., 2003).
The ﬁeld of imaging spectroscopy itself has a long history
that can be traced back to early instruments built at NASA’s
Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the early 1980s (Gao et al.,
2009). These instruments were built to measure the solar
radiance after reﬂection from the earth’s surface. These
measurements can then be analyzed to recover valuable
atmospheric and surface properties. Recently, there has
been a growing interest to use these instruments to assess
the environmental effects of climate change including:
Oceanic effects: Monitor ocean circulation, measure
the ocean temperature and wave heights, and track sea
ice (NOAA, 2009).
Land effects: Track changes in land vegetation, defor-
estation, and examine the health of indigenous plants
and crops (Guo et al., 2013).
Atmospheric pollution: Quantify worldwide emissions,
concentrations of air pollutants, and their trends. (Na-
tional Academies of Sciences & Medicine, 2018).
Though these are examples scenarios in which imaging
spectrometers have successfully been used till date, the
near future presents an unprecedented opportunity for rapid
progress in applications of remote sensing to beneﬁt society,
due to recent computing advances. (National Academies of
Sciences & Medicine, 2018).
1The term remote sensing is used interchangeably with imaging
spectroscopy henceforth.Learning RTMs for Climate Change Applications
However, the process of recovering surface properties from
imaging data collected by spectrometers is fraught with
challenges. Of crucial concern among these is the accurate
removal of atmospheric effects from the radiation incident
on the sensor. These effects are introduced since the so-
lar radiation on the Sun-surface-sensor path is subject to
atmospheric effects such as scattering and absorption. Re-
covering the true surface parameters requires inverting the
measurement with a physical model of the atmospheric ra-
diative transfer in a process called atmospheric correction.
A fundamental component of this process is Radiative Trans-
fer Models (RTMs) (Stamnes et al., 2017), which are respon-
sible for solving the general equations of radiative transport
based on known input parameters (such as solar radiance and
surface characteristics). This is a computationally expensive
process which has to be potentially be run on millions of
spectra acquired by high bandwidth imaging spectrometers.
Since these instruments produce too high a quantity of data
to be processed with an RTM, typically RTMs are used to
calculate lookup tables based on the atmospheric conditions
observed during image acquisition. These lookup tables
can then be used for interpolation during runtime instead
of running the full forward RTM computation. Though this
approach works in practice, we can only precompute values
for a limited number of parameters, since the number of
samples needed to represent the state space grows exponen-
tially with the number of input variables. An alternative
solution would be to speed up RTMs such that they could
be efﬁciently used at runtime. This would yield multiple
downstream beneﬁts during analysis, including enabling the
remote sensing community to pursue new surface retrieval
and optimal estimation (OE) approaches.
2. Learning Radiative Transfer Models
Recent work suggests using non parametric function esti-
mation through models such as Gaussian processes (Mar-
tino et al., 2017), or neural networks (Verrelst et al., 2016;
Thompson et al., 2018a; Bue et al., 2019) for emulating
RTMs. The training dataset would consist of data generated
through RTMs over the required range of surface and atmo-
spheric parameters. A function approximator trained on this
datd could then act as the RTM for the process of inversion,
without having to actually solve the underlying differential
equation. To better model the dataset, we designed a neural
network architecture that better models the underlying phys-
ical parameter space. This section aims to introduce the core
ideas behind the RTM emulation technique we designed.
2.1. Decomposition of parameter space
The radiative transfer function F(x)can be analytically
decomposed into intermediate quantities that are easier to
model, which include: solar illumination components, andtop of atmosphere reﬂectance (TOA) obs=y
oeo, which is
normalized for the solar illumination. The quantities oand
eocan then be used to infer the corresponding radiance.
Figure 1. Neural RTM
2.2. Monochromatic subnetworks
The observed radiance within any wavelength channel can
be fully speciﬁed channel speciﬁc the parameters. Formally,
absent any prior distribution that couples the inﬂuence of
neighboring wavelengths, the radiance across channels be-
come conditionally independent of each other given the
channel parameters. This insight permits us to decompose
the RTMF(x)into intermediate functions fi(x)k
i=1fork
different wavelength channels. Using this insight, we can
train subnetworks that regress on radiance values in a single
channel, instead of regressing across the entire wavelength
spectrum. Another beneﬁt of this approach is that the partial
derivatives of the radiance channels with respect to their
surface reﬂectance are independent of each other, which
simpliﬁes analytical Jacobians calculations during iterative
gradient descent inversions (Thompson et al., 2018b).
2.3. Weight Propagation
The spectral responses for adjacent wavelengths are often
correlated, and hence we use the converged weights from
subnetworks of previous channels as priors for training the
current subnetwork. These weights can then be ﬁne-tuned
to estimate the radiances for the current channel. In com-
parison to training subnetworks from scratch, this approach
yields a substantial reduction in training time along with
improved accuracy.Learning RTMs for Climate Change Applications
3. Experiments
We investigate the performance of the neural RTM using
data collected by the PRISM (Mouroulis et al., 2008; 2014)
imaging spectrometer. The state space consists of the sur-
face reﬂectance sand the state vector xcontaining other
parameters relevant to retrieval. A set of values were iden-
tiﬁed for the input state vector that correspond to typical
measurement conditions. For ground truth training data, we
generated RTM output using libRadtran, with input parame-
ters relevant to the experiment.
Algorithm 1 Neural RTM Emulation
Input:nxm matrix Xofnstate vectors and mparame-
ters;nxk matrix Yof k-dimensional obsspectra
associated with each state vector at wavelengths
=ik
i=1; convergence tolerance ; maximum
number of training epochs epoch
Output: Neural RTM model F(x)!yconsisting of k
trained neural networks fieach mapping mdi-
mensional state vector xto corresponding obs
response yiat wavelength i
fori= 1tokdo
Letyi=Ybe theobsresponses at wavelength i
associated with the n state vectors
Partition (X;yi)into training, validation, and test sets
Letfibe anL-layer neural network model with a set
of weight matrices and bias vectors
ifi= 1then
Create new model for ﬁrst channel ( riby initializing
weight matrices Wiand bias vectors bi
else
Propagate weight matrices and bias vectors from
the previous model ri 1to current model fi(i.e.
Wi=Wi 1andbi=bi 1
fore= 1toepoch do
Train current network model fion the training set,
to minimize the obsprediction error for channel
centered at wavelength i. Compute the average
erroretestapplyingfito the test set
ifetesthas converged or e=epoch then
return Trained model fi
return Trained neural RTM F(x)!y=fifx!yigk
i=1
Algorithm 1 describes the procedure used to train the neural
RTM. We use a standard feed forward architecture with two
hidden layers, and ReLU (Nair & Hinton, 2010) activation.
The subnetwork weights corresponding to the ﬁrst channel
were initialized (Glorot & Bengio, 2010) and the training of
subsequent subnetworks used weight propagation. Subnet-
works were optimized (Kingma & Ba, 2015), and trained
until the mean absolute error converged to with 0.1%, or the
maximum number of epochs nepoch were reached. Figure
2, shows a plot of the obspredicted using the neural RTMvs the standard radiative transfer code (libRadtran), which
matches to within 0.1% mean absolute error. The code used
to train the neural RTM has been released2.
Figure 2. Ground truth and predicted obsspectra
4. Discussion
We have shown that it is possible to use non parametric func-
tion estimation models for the task of emulating radiative
transfer. In the process we introduced a network architec-
ture and training techniques that help to better model the
underlying physical parameter space. This formulation of-
fers a path to increase the interpolation accuracy of current
approaches, reduce the runtime by several orders of mag-
nitude, and will enable the imaging community to pursue
new surface retrieval approaches. More broadly, the ﬁeld
of remote sensing and earth science are ripe for impact due
to the exponential growth rate in data generation coupled
with recent developments in machine learning. We have
presented one such example of research that will have po-
tential impact in enabling the earth science community to
understand, quantify and draw connections between rapidly
changing climatic conditions and environmental impact.
Acknowledgements
We thank Michael Eastwood and Robert O. Green for pro-
viding expertise in the theory and application of imaging
spectroscopy and atmospheric correction methods. We fur-
ther thank Terry Mullen for contributing to the analysis
and generating RTM outputs. This work was undertaken in
part at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of
Technology, under contract with NASA.
2https://github.com/dsmbgu8/isofit/Learning RTMs for Climate Change Applications
References
Bruckner, A. W. Life-saving products from coral reefs.
Issues in Science and Technology , 18(3), 2002.
Bue, B. D., Thompson, D. R., Deshpande, S., Eastwood, M.,
Green, R. O., Mullen, T., Natraj, V ., and Parente, M. Neu-
ral network radiative transfer for imaging spectroscopy.
Atmospheric Measurement Techniques Discussions , 2019:
1–16, 2019.
Duren, R., Thorpe, A., and Sander, S. California baseline
methane survey, interim phase 1 report. 2017.
Eakin, C. M., Nim, C. J., Brainard, R. E., et al. Monitoring
coral reefs from space. Oceanography , 23(4):118–133,
2010. ISSN 10428275, 2377617X.
Emde, C., Buras-Schnell, R., Kylling, A., et al. The librad-
tran software package for radiative transfer calculations
(version 2.0.1). Geoscientiﬁc Model Development , 9(5):
1647–1672, 2016.
Gao, B.-C., Montes, M. J., Davis, C. O., and Goetz, A. F.
Atmospheric correction algorithms for hyperspectral re-
mote sensing data of land and ocean. Remote Sensing
of Environment , 113:S17 – S24, 2009. ISSN 0034-4257.
Imaging Spectroscopy Special Issue.
Glorot, X. and Bengio, Y . Understanding the difﬁculty of
training deep feedforward neural networks. In AISTATS ,
2010.
Guo, H., Huang, Q., Li, X., Sun, Z., and Zhang, Y . Spa-
tiotemporal analysis of urban environment based on the
vegetationimpervious surfacesoil model. Journal of Ap-
plied Remote Sensing , 8(1):1 – 17 – 17, 2013.
Hochberg, E. J., Atkinson, M. J., and Andrfout, S. Spectral
reﬂectance of coral reef bottom-types worldwide and im-
plications for coral reef remote sensing. Remote Sensing
of Environment , 85(2):159 – 173, 2003. ISSN 0034-4257.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Mumby, P. J., Hooten, A. J., et al.
Coral reefs under rapid climate change and ocean acid-
iﬁcation. Science , 318(5857):1737–1742, 2007. ISSN
0036-8075.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., M. Eakin, C., and Hodgson, G. e. a.
Isrs consensus statement on coral bleaching climate
change. 11 2018.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. CoRR , abs/1412.6980, 2015.
Martino, L., Vicent, J., and Camps-Valls, G. Automatic
emulator and optimized look-up table generation for ra-
diative transfer models. 2017 IEEE International Geo-
science and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS) , pp.
1457–1460, 2017.Mouroulis, P., Green, R. O., and Wilson, D. W. Optical
design of a coastal ocean imaging spectrometer. Opt.
Express , 16(12):9087–9096, Jun 2008.
Mouroulis, P., Gorp, B. V ., Green, R. O., et al. Portable re-
mote imaging spectrometer coastal ocean sensor: design,
characteristics, and ﬁrst ﬂight results. Appl. Opt. , 53(7):
1363–1380, Mar 2014.
Nair, V . and Hinton, G. E. Rectiﬁed linear units improve
restricted boltzmann machines. In ICML , 2010.
National Academies of Sciences, E. and Medicine. Thriving
on Our Changing Planet: A Decadal Strategy for Earth
Observation from Space . The National Academies Press,
Washington, DC, 2018. ISBN 978-0-309-46757-5.
Nicholls, R. J., Wong, P. P., Burkett, V ., Codignotto, J.,
Hay, J., McLean, R., Ragoonaden, S., Woodroffe, C. D.,
Abuodha, P., Arblaster, J., et al. Coastal systems and
low-lying areas. 2007.
NOAA. What is remote sensing?, Aug 2009. URL
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/
remotesensing.html .
Roberts, C. M., McClean, C. J., and Veron, J. E. N. o.
Marine biodiversity hotspots and conservation priorities
for tropical reefs. Science , 295(5558):1280–1284, 2002.
ISSN 0036-8075.
Stamnes, K., Thomas, G. E., and Stamnes, J. J. Ra-
diative Transfer in the Atmosphere and Ocean . Cam-
bridge University Press, 2 edition, 2017. doi: 10.1017/
9781316148549.
Thompson, D., W. Boardman, J., and L. Eastwood, M. o.
Imaging spectrometer stray spectral response: In-ﬂight
characterization, correction, and validation. Remote Sens-
ing of Environment , 204, 09 2018a.
Thompson, D. R., Hochberg, E. J., Asner, G. P., et al.
Airborne mapping of benthic reﬂectance spectra with
bayesian linear mixtures. Remote Sensing of Environ-
ment , 200:18 – 30, 2017. ISSN 0034-4257.
Thompson, D. R., Natraj, V ., and others, R. O. G. Optimal
estimation for imaging spectrometer atmospheric correc-
tion. Remote Sensing of Environment , 216:355 – 373,
2018b. ISSN 0034-4257.
Verrelst, J., Sabater, N., Rivera, J. P., et al. Emulation of
leaf, canopy and atmosphere radiative transfer models for
fast global sensitivity analysis. Remote Sensing , 8:673,
2016.
WWF. Coral reefs. URL http://wwf.panda.org/
our_work/oceans/coasts/coral_reefs/ .