Low-carbon urban planning with machine learning
Nikola Milojevic-Dupont1 2Felix Creutzig1 2
Abstract
Widespread climate action is urgently needed, but
current solutions do not account enough for local
differences. Here, we take the example of cities
to point to the potential of machine learning (ML)
for generating at scale high-resolution informa-
tion on energy use and greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, and make this information actionable
for concrete solutions. We map the existing rele-
vant ML literature and articulate ML methods that
can make sense of spatial data for climate solu-
tions in cities. Machine learning has the potential
to ﬁnd solutions that are tailored for each settle-
ment, and transfer solutions across the world.
1. Introduction
Climate change mitigation research provides a reﬁned set of
methods whose outcomes serve as a reference for govern-
ments and individuals for climate action, e.g. by simulating
portfolios of decarbonization pathways consistent both with
global average temperature stabilization targets and stylized
societal or environmental constraints (IPCC, 2018). Yet,
large disagreements remain about mitigation potentials, e.g.
for energy end-uses (Creutzig et al., 2019). The emergence
of big data and ML methods offers climate solution research
to overcome generic recommendations and provide options
at urban, street, building scale, adapted to speciﬁc contexts,
but scalable to global mitigation potentials.
We conduct a systematic review of applied ML studies that
use on spatial data for mitigating climate change in cities.
Speciﬁcally, we survey the ﬁelds of remote sensing, trans-
port, and buildings. Based on research queries in Web of
Science, and following reporting standards for evidence syn-
theses (Haddaway & Macura, 2018), we ﬁnd few research
1Mercator Research Institute on Global Commons and Climate
Change, Berlin, Germany2Technical University Berlin, Germany.
Correspondence to: Nikola Milojevic-Dupont <milojevic@mcc-
berlin.net >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).papers relying on ML methods to explicitly tackle climate
change mitigation. However, there are more than ten times
more sector-speciﬁc studies that either address GHG emis-
sions or energy use directly, or offer important intermediary
material while not making the link to energy use and emis-
sions explicit. For an overview of the most prevalent topics
and methods retrieved, see Fig. 2.
2. Digital twins of cities’ metabolism
We argue that ML methods have the potential to transform
climate mitigation research by generating digital twins1of
cities’ metabolism2. Such models would connect together
urban structure and activities inﬂuencing energy use and
GHG emissions (see Fig. 1). A central hypothesis is that city
metabolism can be predicted from the former city character-
istics, if high resolution data is integrated (Silva et al., 2018;
2017; Creutzig et al., 2016; Zheng et al., 2014). We ﬁrst
detail current ML methods that can generate knowledge on
urban structures and activities relevant to city metabolism.
Infrastructures observed from big data. Infrastructures
are the physical basis of cities. They are a ﬁrst-order com-
ponent to analyse city metabolism, and predict localized
energy or emissions patterns. Many data sources are avail-
able, from remote sensing to city sensors; but this data is
often incomplete and the link with cities’ metabolism is
rarely made. ML can retrieve information to model infras-
tructures (Esch et al., 2017; Blaha et al., 2016) or mobility
ﬂows (Zhao et al., 2016) at ﬁne grain. This knowledge en-
ables the determination of spatial patterns of CO 2emissions
(Tao et al., 2014) and deployment strategies for mitigation
technologies (Yu et al., 2018).
Technological efﬁciency. Individual technological com-
ponents determine the efﬁciency of the urban metabolism
(Gershenfeld et al., 2010). Technologies have been sub-
ject to more precise modelling at small scale using ML. In
1Digital twins are virtual replications of physical entities that
enables to simulate their behaviors, e.g. for real-time optimization
or predictive maintenance. Originally developed for manufacturing
applications, digital twins could address the lack of spatial context
in mitigation studies. Note that highly simpliﬁed twins may be
sufﬁcient here, while reducing storage and computation needs.
2City metabolism refers to energy use and GHG emissions in
cities, but can also include other ﬂows like materials and wastes.Low-carbon urban planning with machine learning
Figure 1. Towards digital twins of cities’ metabolism. ( A) Main components of machine learning research on urban spaces relevant to
climate change mitigation. Data sensed in the physical world and processed by ML enables to model and predict cities infrastructures and
activities, assess at ﬁne-grain their metabolism, and model different future pathways towards low-carbon societies. ( B) Integrating ML
studies on cities has the potential to scale up of urban solutions. (VGI: V oluntary Geographical Information)
buildings, ML helps understand load signals (Kelly & Knot-
tenbelt, 2015) and optimize devices or system, e.g. cooling
(Wang et al., 2017). For efﬁcient mobility, ML can identify
inefﬁcacies in driving (Maga ˜na & Mu ˜noz-Organero, 2015).
However, these studies are often idiosyncratic. Transfer
learning can upscale their spatial relevance (Mocanu et al.,
2016). Linking these methods with infrastructure models
could improve district-scale efﬁciency projects.
Human behaviors and perceptions. Dwellers’ choices
ultimately determine activity levels and resulting emis-
sions (Creutzig et al., 2018). ML helps target interven-
tions through behavioral models of: acceptance of novelty
(Carr-Cornish et al., 2011), triggers and resistances to more
energy-efﬁcient lifestyles (Gabe-Thomas et al., 2016), or
mobility mode choices and shifts (Yang et al., 2018). Within
digital twins, modelling human behaviors can help identify
dynamic feedbacks: for example, infrastructure provision
(such as bike lanes) can foster changes in mobility choices.
Planning & management. A last holistic layer is to modify
the infrastructure in order to frame future usages. For exam-
ple, spatial settings can offer low-carbon transport systems,
with reduced distance, and more energy efﬁcient transport
modes, if connectivity is high, land-use is mixed, and struc-
tures are compact. A handful of studies have targeted urban
planning, e.g. linking urban form and travel behavior (Ding
et al., 2018). ML also supports the deployment of low car-
bon modes, e.g electric vehicles (Longo et al., 2017) or
shared bikes (Xu et al., 2018).3. Climate solutions from spatial settings
We ﬁnd that a main limitation of the surveyed literature is the
dominance of utilizing ML for optimizing current usages,
which can lead to substantial rebound effects (Azevedo,
2014). In turn, we argue for greater focus on where ro-
bust and long-term mitigation potential is found: in spatial
conﬁgurations and policy options that can shape them.
Our proposed architecture of ML for low-carbon Urban
Planning could help progress towards planning scenarios
at high spatial and contextual resolution. Our workﬂow
is two-fold (see Fig. 3). First, it would aim at integrating
high-resolution data to generate climate semantics. Relevant
ML here includes supervised learning for inferring missing
data, and typology methods that identify informative pat-
terns (Creutzig et al., 2015). This stage would provide the
base of the digital twin. Second, an action-oriented block
would focus on making sense of this data to ﬁnd policy
options. Methods include scenario techniques to simulate
development pathways, reinforcement learning to model lo-
cal interactions and causal inference can assess the success
of policies.
Such an architecture could stimulate more agile and rapid
deployment of effective solution strategies in human settle-
ments. First, it could transform environmental assessments
like the IPCC. Second, it would help policy makers imple-
ment municipal climate action. Third, it could have the
highest value in developing countries with low resources.Low-carbon urban planning with machine learning
Figure 2. Summary of machine learning methods reviewed. Re-
mote sensing, and to lesser degree, spatial studies in mobility and
buildings, rely on ML methods, while climate change mitigation
studies only scarcely build on ML methods. Supervised learning
tasks (columns 1 to 6) are the most frequent applications in all
ﬁelds. The information was extracted from the publicly available
metadata of the records; Machine Learning not deﬁned is reported
when there is no speciﬁc method available from the metadata.
When several groups of methods are used in a record (e.g. dimen-
sionality reduction and supervised learning), the record is counted
in both categories.
Figure 3. An architecture of machine learning for low-carbon ur-
ban planning. ( A) The architecture is an information ﬂow from big
data to semantically relevant data for climate change mitigation-
oriented urban planning. The data can be processed by a succession
of different phases including ML and other media. ( B) An example
workﬂow for estimating energy use of individual buildings at large
scale. Spatial data available at large scale are trained with precisely
metered building data.Low-carbon urban planning with machine learning
References
Azevedo, I. M. Consumer end-use energy efﬁciency and
rebound effects. Annual Review of Environment and
Resources , 39:393–418, 2014.
Blaha, M., V ogel, C., Richard, A., Wegner, J. D., Pock, T.,
and Schindler, K. Large-scale semantic 3d reconstruc-
tion: an adaptive multi-resolution model for multi-class
volumetric labeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp.
3176–3184, 2016.
Carr-Cornish, S., Ashworth, P., Gardner, J., and Fraser, S. J.
Exploring the orientations which characterise the likely
public acceptance of low emission energy technologies.
Climatic change , 107(3-4):549–565, 2011.
Creutzig, F., Baiocchi, G., Bierkandt, R., Pichler, P.-P., and
Seto, K. C. Global typology of urban energy use and
potentials for an urbanization mitigation wedge. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 112(20):
6283–6288, 2015.
Creutzig, F., Fernandez, B., Haberl, H., Khosla, R., Mu-
lugetta, Y ., and Seto, K. C. Beyond technology: demand-
side solutions for climate change mitigation. Annual Re-
view of Environment and Resources , 41:173–198, 2016.
Creutzig, F., Roy, J., Lamb, W. F., Azevedo, I. M., de Bruin,
W. B., Dalkmann, H., Edelenbosch, O. Y ., Geels, F. W.,
Grubler, A., Hepburn, C., et al. Towards demand-side
solutions for mitigating climate change. Nature Climate
Change , 8(4):268, 2018.
Creutzig, F., Lohrey, S., Bai, X., Baklanov, A., Dawson,
R., Dhakal, S., Lamb, W. F., McPhearson, T., Minx, J.,
Munoz, E., and et al. Upscaling urban data science for
global climate solutions. Global Sustainability , 2:e2,
2019. doi: 10.1017/sus.2018.16.
Ding, C., Cao, X. J., and Næss, P. Applying gradient boost-
ing decision trees to examine non-linear effects of the
built environment on driving distance in oslo. Transporta-
tion Research Part A: Policy and Practice , 110:107–117,
2018.
Esch, T., Heldens, W., Hirner, A., Keil, M., Marconcini, M.,
Roth, A., Zeidler, J., Dech, S., and Strano, E. Breaking
new ground in mapping human settlements from space–
the global urban footprint. ISPRS Journal of Photogram-
metry and Remote Sensing , 134:30–42, 2017.
Gabe-Thomas, E., Walker, I., Verplanken, B., and Shad-
dick, G. Householders mental models of domestic energy
consumption: using a sort-and-cluster method to identify
shared concepts of appliance similarity. PloS one , 11(7):
e0158949, 2016.Gershenfeld, N., Samouhos, S., and Nordman, B. Intelligent
infrastructure for energy efﬁciency. Science , 327(5969):
1086–1088, 2010. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.
1174082.
Haddaway, N. R. and Macura, B. The role of reporting
standards in producing robust literature reviews. Nature
Climate Change , 8(6):444, 2018.
IPCC. Global warming of 1.5C. An IPCC special re-
port on the impacts of global warming of 1.5C above
pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas
emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the
global response to the threat of climate change, sustain-
able development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [V.
Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H. O. P ¨ortner, D. Roberts,
J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, Y. Chen, S. Connors, M.
Gomis, E. Lonnoy, J. B. R. Matthews, W. Moufouma-Okia,
C. P´ean, R. Pidcock, N. Reay, M. Tignor, T. Waterﬁeld, X.
Zhou (eds.)] . 2018.
Kelly, J. and Knottenbelt, W. Neural nilm: Deep neural
networks applied to energy disaggregation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2Nd ACM International Conference on Em-
bedded Systems for Energy-Efﬁcient Built Environments ,
BuildSys ’15, pp. 55–64, New York, NY , USA, 2015.
ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3981-0.
Longo, M., Foiadelli, F., Franzo, S., Frattini, F., and Latilla,
V . M. Towards the development of residential smart dis-
tricts: The role of evs. In 2017 IEEE International Con-
ference on Environment and Electrical Engineering and
2017 IEEE Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
Europe (EEEIC/I&CPS Europe) , pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
Maga ˜na, V . C. and Mu ˜noz-Organero, M. Discovering re-
gions where users drive inefﬁciently on regular journeys.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,
16(1):221–234, 2015.
Mocanu, E., Nguyen, P. H., Kling, W. L., and Gibescu, M.
Unsupervised energy prediction in a Smart Grid context
using reinforcement cross-building transfer learning. En-
ergy and Buildings , 116:646–655, March 2016. ISSN
03787788.
Silva, M., Leal, V ., Oliveira, V ., and Horta, I. M. A scenario-
based approach for assessing the energy performance
of urban development pathways. Sustainable cities and
society , 40:372–382, 2018.
Silva, M. C., Horta, I. M., Leal, V ., and Oliveira, V . A
spatially-explicit methodological framework based on
neural networks to assess the effect of urban form on
energy demand. Applied energy , 202:386–398, 2017.Low-carbon urban planning with machine learning
Tao, J., Zhou, Y ., Wu, W., and Yu, L. Estimating carbon
dioxide concentrations in urban areas from satellite im-
agery using bayesian network. In 2014 The Third Inter-
national Conference on Agro-Geoinformatics , pp. 1–7.
IEEE, 2014.
Wang, Z., Wang, Z., He, S., Gu, X., and Yan, Z. F. Fault de-
tection and diagnosis of chillers using Bayesian network
merged distance rejection and multi-source non-sensor
information. Applied Energy , 188:200–214, February
2017. ISSN 0306-2619.
Xu, C., Ji, J., and Liu, P. The station-free sharing bike de-
mand forecasting with a deep learning approach and large-
scale datasets. Transportation research part C: emerging
technologies , 95:47–60, 2018.
Yang, J., Shebalov, S., and Klabjan, D. Semi-supervised
learning for discrete choice models. IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems , 2018.
Yu, J., Wang, Z., Majumdar, A., and Rajagopal, R. Deep-
solar: A machine learning framework to efﬁciently con-
struct a solar deployment database in the united states.
Joule , 2(12):2605 – 2617, 2018. ISSN 2542-4351.
Zhao, K., Tarkoma, S., Liu, S., and V o, H. Urban hu-
man mobility data mining: An overview. In 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) , pp.
1911–1920. IEEE, 2016.
Zheng, Y ., Capra, L., Wolfson, O., and Yang, H. Urban
computing: Concepts, methodologies, and applications.
ACM Transaction on Intelligent Systems and Technology ,
October 2014.