Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Shreya Bali* 1Sydney Zheng* 1Akshina Gupta* 1Yue Wu* 1Blair Chen* 1Anirban Chowdhury* 1
Justin Khim† 2
Abstract
Peat ﬁres are the largest ﬁres on earth in terms of
fuel consumption and are responsible for a sig-
niﬁcant portion of global carbon emissions. Pre-
dicting ﬁres in the peatlands can help decision
makers and researchers monitor and prevent peat
ﬁres. Despite this, research on predicting peatland
ﬁres remains largely understudied as compared
to prediction of other forms of ﬁres. However,
peatland ﬁres are unique among ﬁres and there-
fore require datasets and architectures attuned to
their particular characteristics. In this paper, we
present a new dataset, PeatSet, designed speciﬁ-
cally for the problem of peatland ﬁre prediction.
In addition, we propose several models to tackle
the problem of ﬁre prediction for the peatlands.
We develop novel neural architectures for peat-
land ﬁre prediction, PeatNet and PT-Net, with
a graph-based and a transformer-based architec-
ture, respectively. Our results indicate that these
new deep-learning architectures outperform a re-
gression baseline from existing peatland research.
Among all the tested models, PT-Net achieves the
highest F1 score of 0.1006 and an overall accuracy
of 99.84%.
1. Introduction
Peatlands are a type of wetland that include marshes, bogs,
fens, and swamps. They sequester more than twice as much
carbon as stored in the world’s forests despite covering
only 3% of the Earth’s land area (International Union for
Conservation of Nature, 2017; Turetsky et al., 2015). Cli-
mate change has exacerbated the magnitude and frequency
of ﬁres and the length of the ﬁre season (Flannigan et al.,
2009). Additionally, peat ﬁres release a large amount of the
carbon sequestered in peatlands, emitting massive amounts
*Equal contribution†The contributions in this paper were made
prior to joining Amazon.1Carnegie Mellon University2Amazon.
Correspondence to: Shreya Bali <balishreya1@gmail.com >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).of carbon dioxide. The combination of anthropogenic cli-
mate change and peat ﬁres form a positive feedback loop of
peatland carbon emissions.
Several features of peatland ﬁres differentiate them from
commonly-explored forest ﬁre approaches. First, peat ﬁres
produce less heat than typical ﬁres. Second, peat ﬁres can
occur underground, in wet or cold areas, and even under
snow as exempliﬁed by western Canadian peat ﬁres (Thomp-
son, 2020). Third, peat ﬁres can last for months when they
are smouldering underground, challenging the use of burn
duration as a heuristic for ﬁre severity. Fourth, factors such
as soil carbon and soil moisture are far more important for
peatland ﬁres than forest ﬁres since the soil itself is a fuel
source. Consequently, normal ﬁre prediction techniques are
less effective on peatland ﬁres.
Prior work on regular forest ﬁre and peatland ﬁre prediction
do present baselines to test the suggested models against.
Most notably, the current state-of-the-art machine learning
algorithms for forest ﬁre prediction use convolutional neural
networks (CNN) (Hodges et al., 2019; Radke et al., 2019).
Within the peatland research domain, there has only been
a handful of studies in ﬁre prediction, and far fewer that
leverage deep-learning methods. Honma et al. (2016); Listy-
orini and Rahim (2018) use a system of detectors near a
speciﬁc peatland to predict ﬁre spread. Bourgeau-Chavez
et al. (2020a) perform a review of four ﬁres in peatlands to
determine how the type of a peatland affects its likelihood
of burning (Bourgeau-Chavez et al., 2020b). Maulana et al.
(2019) use logistic regression to predict active ﬁre areas.
However, these models fail to scale well and are unable
capture the complex relation between different causes as
well as needed. Due to space constraints, we defer a more
detailed discussion of previous work in Appendix I.
We propose bridging between the technical research on deep
learning architectures and the scientiﬁc research on peat-
land ﬁres to create a powerful prediction model for peatland
ﬁres. In line with this, our ﬁrst general contribution is a new
dataset, PeatSet, designed speciﬁcally for the problem of
peatland ﬁre prediction using previously existing datasets
in the region of Canada. Our second main contribution,
are two novel neural architectures for peatland ﬁre predic-
tion, PeatNet and PT-Net that we propose, implement, andPrediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Figure 1. (upper-left) Tarnocai Peatland heatmap indicating percentage(%) of peatland cover. (upper-right) Burned area in the peatlands
by masking the CWFIS burned area with Tarnocai. CWFIS data was max aggregated from 2012 to 2018. (lower-left) CO2emissions in
the peatlands by masking the Global CarbonTracker data with Tarnocai. Data is in units of molar density, and is mean aggregated from
2012 to 2018. (lower-right) Total organic carbon content ( kg=m2) in the peatlands by the Tarnocai dataset.
test. PeatNet is a graph-based architecture, and PT-Net is a
transformer-based architecture.
This paper is organized as follows: in section 2, we highlight
our dataset and model contributions; in section 3, we present
our results in Results and in section 4, we present an analysis
of the results .
2. Methodology
In this section, we elaborate on our two main contributions:
the dataset and the models.
2.1. Dataset: PeatSet
Our ﬁrst contribution is the curation of the ﬁrst compre-
hensive peat ﬁre dataset, PeatSet, consisting of previously
existing remote sensing and manually labelled datasets. The
spatial region of our dataset covers Canada because of the
large area of peatlands and its relative abundance of publicly
available data. We use PeatSet for the tasks of predicting
CWFIS burned area categories. Figure 1 presents visual-
izations of the key features used over the Canadian region.
Table 2 in Appendix II presents the features used for the
prediction of ﬁres.
Peatland Features: To delineate peatland from other land,
we use the Tarnocai Peatland Map, which is the standard
dataset used for determining where peatlands are in Canada.
The map is divided into polygons, where each has an asso-
ciated percentage of peatland cover, PEATLAND P.
Fire Features: We use the burned area product from the
Canadian Wildland Fire Information System (CWFIS) (Ser-
vice, b), the most comprehensive dataset for ﬁres in Canada.The data is in part manually reported from governmental
agencies, and should have greater inclusion of the unique
kind of ﬁres in peatlands as compared to remote sensing
sources.
CO 2Emissions Features: We use the Global Monitoring
Laboratory Carbon Tracker CT2019, which has a 3-by-2
longitude/latitude resolution across the globe for CO 2emis-
sions. CT2019 also includes the ﬂux of CO 2across the
globe. Flux is the gradient of concentration, and determines
the source of the CO 2emissions and the cause, e.g. ﬁre, fos-
sil fuels. CO 2emissions is an indirect measurement of the
presence of underground ﬁres, as underground ﬁres output
signiﬁcant CO 2.
Soil Features: We include features pertaining to the amount
of carbon stored in the land, given by the Tarnocai dataset.
Store carbon is a basic indicator of how much CO 2is emitted
if a ﬁre burns over a given area.
Hot Spot Features: We incorporate hot spot data from the
VIIRS dataset, as it indicates where ﬁres are burning. With a
ﬁner resolution, the VIIRS satellite sensor imagery captures
smaller ﬁres as compared to MODIS, the standard satellite-
based data used by many ﬁre datasets such as the Global
Fire Emissions Database (GFED). In general, hot spots have
a conﬁdence measurement of being associated with a ﬁre,
based upon its temperature. Since peatland ﬁres burn at a
lower temperature than traditional ﬁres, low-conﬁdence hot
spots that persist over a long duration may still indicate the
presence of peatland ﬁres.
Additional Soil and Weather Features: From ERA5, we
use soil moisture and soil temperature as indicators of a ﬁre
and wind velocity to account for the spread of CO 2from aPrediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Input 
(b x t, T+S, h, w)        UNet     LSTM    Output 
(b, C, h, w) 
   Permute 
+ 
    Reshape 
(b x h x w, T, C) 
→ (b, c, w) 
   Permute 
+ 
    Reshape 
(b x  t, C’, h, w) 
→ (b x h x w, C’) 
Last 
time 
value 
Figure 2. UNet-LSTM Architecture: Each batch is ﬁrst fed into a U-Net component and then reshaped before being passed into the LSTM
layer. b: batch size, h: height, C0: number of output channels from the U-Net component, C: number of output channels where there is
one for each class.
Graph 
Convolution U-Net-LSTM 
architecture  Input 
Input 
Graph Output 
Figure 3. PeatNet Architecture: Dark points represent peatland, and light points represent non-peatland. Each node also has a self-loop in
addition to the edges shown. Refer to the UNet-LSTM diagram in Figure 2 for a detailed description of its architecture.
 Residual    
Downsample  Residual    
Downsample  Residual    
Downsample 
   Transformer 
Residual 
Upsampling Residual 
Upsampling Residual 
Upsampling     Input 
(b, t x T + S, h, w) 
       Output 
       (b, C, h, w) Linear 
Layer 
Figure 4. PT-Net Architecture: The input batch is encoded by the down-sampling layers, accumulated by the attention modules, and then
up-sampled into the output.
source.
Refer to Appendix II for further details on the dataset fea-
tures and processing.
2.2. Models
We test several models including U-Net, UNet-LSTM, Peat-
Net, and PT-Net. In order to compare our results to previous
work, we also implement and test a logistic regression model
as a baseline. This section ﬁrst describes an auxiliary model
we use, UNet-LSTM, and the two novel model architectures
used for the prediction task, PT-Net and Peatnet.2.3. UNet-LSTM
We implement UNet-LSTM, based on the U-Net model
(Ronneberger et al., 2015), which is able to learn both the
spatial information and temporal information. The diagram
for the UNet-LSTM is shown in Figure 2. The inputs are
ﬁrst passed through the U-Net component and then to the
LSTM layer. The U-Net component considers the temporal
information as a part of the batch dimension, and thus only
learns the spatial features. The output of this component
is then reshaped such that the spatial features are a part of
the batch dimension and the temporal features no longer
are; this is then fed into the LSTM layer, which learns only
temporal relations.Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Recall Precision F1 Accuracy
LR 0.8186 0.0016 0.0032 0.4298
U 0.9906 0.0212 0.0419 0.9607
UL 0.9944 0.0294 0.0571 0.9650
PN 0.9668 0.0274 0.0532 0.9632
PT 0.9232 0.0532 0.1006 0.9984
Table 1. Prediction results. Accuracy is high across all the models
since there are more non-ﬁre points as compared to ﬁre points.
It is therefore more meaningful to examine the recall, precision,
and F1. Here, PT-Net dominates the other models. LR - Logistic
Regression, U - UNet, UL - UNet-LSTM, PN - PeatNet, PT -
PT-Net.
2.3.1. P EATNET
We ﬁrst propose PeatNet, a novel graph network model,
which is a graph-based neural network model designed to
account for the underground spread of peat ﬁres. Refer to
Figure 3 for the outline of the architecture. The landmass
is represented as being composed of a grid of points, where
each point is a node in the graph. Nodes that model a
point on peatland are connected to other peatland nodes
within a distance of k, a hyperparameter; though a ﬁre
may spread far away, it is unlikely to spread past a certain
distance. Each node also has a self-edge to model that a
site with a ﬁre will likely continue to have ﬁre. A graph
convolution is then applied to the graph, such that the nodes
representing peatland gain information about other peatland
nodes. We then pass the graphical convolution result and
the original input features to a UNet-LSTM component.
Finally, the output of the UNet-LSTM is passed through a
fully connected layer to yield the ﬁnal output.
2.3.2. PT-N ET
The second model that we propose is PT-Net. Recent state-
of-the-art studies show that attention-based neural networks
are able to capture sequence-based data better than other
neural networks, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
models. Our model is based on a residual encoder-decoder
(He et al., 2015) with three down-sampling blocks in the
encoder and three up-sampling blocks in the decoder, as
shown in Figure 4. We account for temporal relations with a
transformer module (Vaswani et al., 2017), which has three
multi-head self-attention layers that focus on multiple past
time-steps to predict the future time-step.
3. Results
In this section, we detail the training and testing and present
the results in Table 1.
The models are evaluated on recall, precision, F1, and ac-
curacy. Each model is provided 5 days of covariate inputdata and predicts CWFIS burn classes for the subsequent
day. The data is split into 70% train, 15% test and 15%
validation days.
Note that for this task, recall is deﬁned as the fraction of the
ﬁres correctly predicted over the total number of ﬁres. Pre-
cision is deﬁned as the fraction of the correct ﬁres predicted
over the total number of ﬁres predicted.
We use binary cross entropy as the loss function for training
the models. Note that the dataset is heavily skewed since
there are far more non-ﬁre points than ﬁre points. We weigh
the ﬁre class a thousand times more heavily than the non-
ﬁre class because there are about one thousand non-ﬁre
data-points in training to a ﬁre data-point.
4. Discussion
We ﬁrst assemble a collection of relevant datasets to enable
future studies of peatland ﬁres. We hope that the data collec-
tion we provide will facilitate further research into peatland
ﬁre prediction. Additionally, we develop several novel ar-
chitectures and adapt recent machine learning models to the
problem of peat ﬁre prediction. Our best model, PT-Net,
shows great improvement in performance over previous
models for ﬁre prediction.
Our experiments show that models that consider spatiotem-
poral aspects of the data outperform those that do not. The
regression model, which does not have information from
nearby blocks, performs drastically worse than the models
with access to spatial information. The UNet-LSTM and
PT-Net, which both use spatial and temporal features, outper-
form the U-Net, which does not capture temporal informa-
tion. PT-Net outperforms U-Net, UNet-LSTM, and PeatNet.
A likely explanation for the higher performance of UNet-
LSTM as compared to PeatNet is that locality generally
dominates in ﬁre modeling, and therefore, the long-distance
relationships PeatNet captures through its graph-layer are
less relevant.
This work can easily be expanded to other peatlands across
the world with appropriate dataset expansion. The ﬂexibility
of our neural network approach allows additional features
to be easily integrated. Additionally, accurate ﬁre spread
and severity prediction can allow decision makers to invest
their attention to peatlands at high risk for ﬁres and take
appropriate preventative actions. By applying the tools
developed in this work to the ﬁre safety industry, we can
signiﬁcantly mitigate the carbon emissions that contribute
to climate change today and reduce the damage caused by
peat ﬁres, as well as preserve existing peatland ecosystems.Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
References
A. R. Jacobson, K. N. Schuldt, J. B. M. T. O. P. T. A. A. J.
M. L. O. G. J. C. T. A. S. A. K. A. S. A. F. A. B. B. P. B.
A. B. S. C. B. A. B. D. B. G. B. J. B. A. G. C. H. C. L. C. .
M. Z. (2020). Carbontracker ct2019. model published by
noaa earth system research laboratory, global monitoring
division, 2020.
Bourgeau-Chavez, L. L., S. Endres, R. Powell, M. J.
Battaglia, B. Benscoter, M. Turetsky, E. S. Kasischke,
and E. Banda (2017). Mapping boreal peatland ecosys-
tem types from multitemporal radar and optical satellite
imagery. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 47 (4),
545–559.
Bourgeau-Chavez, L. L., S. L. Grelik, M. Billmire, L. K.
Jenkins, E. S. Kasischke, and M. R. Turetsky (2020a).
Assessing boreal peat ﬁre severity and vulnerability of
peatlands to early season wildland ﬁre.
Bourgeau-Chavez, L. L., S. L. Grelik, M. Billmire, L. K.
Jenkins, E. S. Kasischke, and M. R. Turetsky (2020b).
Assessing boreal peat ﬁre severity and vulnerability of
peatlands to early season wildland ﬁre.
Castelli, M., L. Vanneschi, and A. Popovi ˇc (2015). Predict-
ing burned areas of forest ﬁres: an artiﬁcial intelligence
approach. Fire ecology 11 (1), 106–118.
Cofﬁeld, S. R., C. A. Graff, Y . Chen, P. Smyth, E. Foufoula-
Georgiou, and J. T. Randerson (2019). Machine learning
to predict ﬁnal ﬁre size at the time of ignition. Interna-
tional journal of wildland ﬁre .
Connolly, J. and N. M. Holden (2017). Detecting peatland
drains with object based image analysis and geoeye-1
imagery. Carbon balance and management 12 (1), 7.
Cortez, P. and A. d. J. R. Morais (2007). A data mining
approach to predict forest ﬁres using meteorological data.
DeLancey, E. R., J. Kariyeva, J. T. Bried, and J. N. Hird
(2019). Large-scale probabilistic identiﬁcation of boreal
peatlands using google earth engine, open-access satellite
data, and machine learning. Plos one 14 (6), e0218165.
Flannigan, M. D., M. A. Krawchuk, W. J. de Groot, B. M.
Wotton, and L. M. Gowman (2009). Implications of
changing climate for global wildland ﬁre. International
journal of wildland ﬁre 18 (5), 483–507.
Ganapathi Subramanian, S. and M. Crowley (2018). Using
spatial reinforcement learning to build forest wildﬁre
dynamics models from satellite images. Frontiers in
ICT 5 , 6.He, K., X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun (2015). Deep resid-
ual learning for image recognition. corr abs/1512.03385
(2015).
Hersbach, H., B. Bell, P. Berrisford, S. Hirahara, A. Hor ´anyi,
J. Mu ˜noz-Sabater, J. Nicolas, C. Peubey, R. Radu,
D. Schepers, et al. (2020). The era5 global reanaly-
sis.Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Soci-
ety 146 (730), 1999–2049.
Hodges, J. L., B. Y . Lattimer, and K. D. Luxbacher (2019).
Compartment ﬁre predictions using transpose convolu-
tional neural networks. Fire Safety Journal 108 , 102854.
Honma, T., K. Kaku, A. Usup, and A. Hidayat (2016). De-
tection and prediction systems of peat-forest ﬁres in cen-
tral kalimantan. In Tropical Peatland Ecosystems , pp.
397–406. Springer.
Hugelius, G., J. Loisel, S. Chadburn, R. B. Jackson,
M. Jones, G. MacDonald, M. Marushchak, D. Olefeldt,
M. Packalen, M. B. Siewert, et al. (2020). Large stocks
of peatland carbon and nitrogen are vulnerable to per-
mafrost thaw. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 117 (34), 20438–20446.
International Union for Conservation of Nature (2017,
November). Peatlands and climate change.
Jin, G., C. Zhu, X. Chen, H. Sha, X. Hu, and J. Huang
(2020). Ufsp-net: a neural network with spatio-temporal
information fusion for urban ﬁre situation prediction. In
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineer-
ing, V olume 853, pp. 012050. IOP Publishing.
Kalacska, M., J. P. Arroyo-Mora, R. J. Soffer, N. T. Roulet,
T. R. Moore, E. Humphreys, G. Leblanc, O. Lucanus, and
D. Inamdar (2018). Estimating peatland water table depth
and net ecosystem exchange: A comparison between
satellite and airborne imagery. Remote Sensing 10 (5),
687.
Liang, H., M. Zhang, and H. Wang (2019). A neural network
model for wildﬁre scale prediction using meteorological
factors. IEEE Access 7 , 176746–176755.
Listyorini, T. and R. Rahim (2018). A prototype ﬁre detec-
tion implemented using the internet of things and fuzzy
logic. World Trans. Eng. Technol. Educ 16 (1), 42–46.
Lozhkin, V ., D. Tarkhov, V . Timofeev, O. Lozhkina, and
A. Vasilyev (2016). Differential neural network approach
in information process for prediction of roadside air pol-
lution by peat ﬁre. In IOP conference series: materials
science and engineering , V olume 158, pp. 012063. IOP
Publishing.Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Mahdianpari, M., B. Salehi, M. Rezaee, F. Mohammadi-
manesh, and Y . Zhang (2018). Very deep convolutional
neural networks for complex land cover mapping using
multispectral remote sensing imagery. Remote Sens-
ing 10 (7), 1119.
Markuzon, N. and S. Kolitz (2009). Data driven approach to
estimating ﬁre danger from satellite images and weather
information. In 2009 ieee applied imagery pattern recog-
nition workshop (aipr 2009) , pp. 1–7. IEEE.
Maulana, S. I., L. Syauﬁna, L. B. Prasetyo, and M. N. Aidi
(2019). Spatial logistic regression models for logistic
repression models for predicting peatland ﬁre in bengkalis
regency, indonesia. Journal of Sustainability Science and
Management 14 (3), 55–66.
Minasny, B., B. I. Setiawan, S. K. Saptomo, A. B. McBrat-
ney, et al. (2018). Open digital mapping as a cost-effective
method for mapping peat thickness and assessing the car-
bon stock of tropical peatlands. Geoderma 313 , 25–40.
Mitsopoulos, I. and G. Mallinis (2017). A data-driven ap-
proach to assess large ﬁre size generation in greece. Nat-
ural Hazards 88 (3), 1591–1607.
Radke, D., A. Hessler, and D. Ellsworth (2019). Firecast:
Leveraging deep learning to predict wildﬁre spread. In
IJCAI , pp. 4575–4581.
Ronneberger, O., P. Fischer, and T. Brox (2015). U-net:
Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmen-
tation. In International Conference on Medical image
computing and computer-assisted intervention , pp. 234–
241. Springer.
Service, C. F. Canadian national ﬁre database – agency
ﬁre data. Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Forest
Service, Northern Forestry Centre, Edmonton, Alberta.
Service, C. F. National burned area composite (nbac). Natu-
ral Resources Canada, Canadian Forest Service, Northern
Forestry Centre, Edmonton, Alberta.
Shidik, G. F. and K. Mustofa (2014). Predicting size of for-
est ﬁre using hybrid model. In Information and Commu-
nication Technology-EurAsia Conference , pp. 316–327.
Springer.
Sitanggang, I. S., R. Yaakob, N. Mustapha, and A. Ainuddin
(2014). A decision tree based on spatial relationships for
predicting hotspots in peatlands. Telkomnika 12 (2), 511.
Subramanian, S. G. and M. Crowley (2017). Learning forest
wildﬁre dynamics from satellite images using reinforce-
ment learning. In Conference on reinforcement learning
and decision making .Tarnocai, C., I. M. Kettles, and B. Lacelle (2011a). Peat-
lands of Canada. Geological Survey of Canada.
Tarnocai, C., I. M. Kettles, and B. Lacelle (2011b). Soil Or-
ganic Carbon Content of Canadian Peatlands. Geological
Survey of Canada.
Tarnocai, C., I. M. Kettles, and B. Lacelle (2011c). Soil
Organic Carbon Mass of Canadian Peatlands. Geological
Survey of Canada.
Thompson, D. (2020, July). Peatland ﬁres and carbon emis-
sions.
Turetsky, M. R., B. Benscoter, S. Page, G. Rein, G. R. Van
Der Werf, and A. Watts (2015). Global vulnerability of
peatlands to ﬁre and carbon loss. Nature Geoscience 8 (1),
11–14.
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones,
A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin (2017). Atten-
tion is all you need. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pp. 5998–6008.
Widyatmanti, W., D. Umarhadi, M. Ningam, Z. Sarah,
K. Nugroho, Y . Sulaeman, et al. (2019). Mapping acid
sulfate soil hydrogeomorphical unit on the peatland land-
scape using a hybrid remote sensing approach. In Tropi-
cal Wetlands-Innovation in Mapping and Management:
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Tropical
Wetlands: Innovation in Mapping and Management, Oc-
tober 19-20, 2018, Banjarmasin, Indonesia , pp. 30. CRC
Press.
Zheng, Z., W. Huang, S. Li, and Y . Zeng (2017). Forest ﬁre
spread simulating model using cellular automaton with
extreme learning machine. Ecological Modelling 348 ,
33–43.Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Appendix I: Previous Work
Forest and Urban Fire Prediction
Fire behavior prediction methods generally focus on predict-
ing growth and spread or predicting ﬁnal severity. In order
to predict severity, many models use metrics such as ﬁnal
burned area or duration of burn. Using the former assumes
severity increases when more land is burned, and using the
latter assume severity increases the longer the ﬁre lasts.
Common ﬁre behavior prediction methods are regression
(Castelli et al., 2015; Cortez and Morais, 2007; Mitsopoulos
and Mallinis, 2017), random forests (Markuzon and Kolitz,
2009; Mitsopoulos and Mallinis, 2017), support vector ma-
chines (Castelli et al., 2015; Cortez and Morais, 2007), or
Bayesian networks (Markuzon and Kolitz, 2009).
Researchers have traditionally formulated the ﬁre prediction
problem as a classiﬁcation problem. The highest accuracy
among these models is 97.5% and is achieved by Shidik
and Mustofa (2014). Similar research achieves far lower
accuracy (Cofﬁeld et al., 2019; Mitsopoulos and Mallinis,
2017). However, these lower-accuracy works create classes
based upon the ground-truth burned area size instead of
clusters on the covariates as done by Shidik and Mustofa
(2014).
While few works have explicitly accounted for temporal
information, Liang et al. (2019) compare a recurrent neural
network (RNN) and an LSTM to predict a numerical custom
ﬁre severity metric. Their results indicate that the LSTM
outperforms the RNN, motivating our use of an LSTM. In
addition, they discuss that meteorological covariates, which
they use, are associated with ﬁre severity. These features
may therefore be worth considering in the peat ﬁre detection
and prediction problem as well.
However, a two-dimensional map of predicted ﬁre perime-
ters is easier for researchers, policymakers, and ﬁre agencies
to analyze and use. Recently, deep learning methods such
as reinforcement learning, CNNs, and graph neural network
(GNN) models have gained more attention in mapping ﬁre
spread.
Reinforcement learning models produce predicted ﬁre
perimeters by viewing the ﬁre as an agent and modelling
actions the agent is likely to take (Zheng et al., 2017; Sub-
ramanian and Crowley, 2017; Ganapathi Subramanian and
Crowley, 2018). Typically, the ﬁre is modelled so it can
only move to nearby areas in a timestep. However, this
formulation of the problem does not apply in the context of
peatland ﬁres since ﬁres are no longer limited to spreading
to the areas around them. Peat ﬁres can go underground
and resurface elsewhere, which is parallel to a delayed jump
action for a ﬁre agent. As such, traditional reinforcement
learning algorithms would have to be altered in order tofunction for peatlands.
The current state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms
for forest ﬁre prediction use convolutional neural networks
(CNN) (Hodges et al., 2019; Radke et al., 2019). Hodges
et al. (2019) to predict future burn perimeters based on six-
hourly burn maps generated by the FARSITE physics-based
simulator. Radke et al. (2019) attempts to use a similar
CNN architecture named FireCast based on daily observed
ﬁre perimeters from GEOMAC instead of simulation burns.
FireCast is able to outperform FARSITE, which establishes
some of the limitations of using simulated burns for train-
ing as compared to observed data. FireCast’s performance
emphasizes recall over precision with very high recall per-
centages but very low precision.
Few works take into account abnormally shaped spatial in-
formation for ﬁre prediction. However, Jin et al. (2020) uses
graph-convolutional layers in a custom architecture, USFP-
Net. The USFP-Net uses a graph convolutional neural net-
work, CNN layers and RNNs to model the ﬁre prediction
problem. USFP-Net outperforms many other common archi-
tectures for urban ﬁre prediction. They represent the area as
a graph with edges with weights inversely proportional to the
distance between them, resulting in a fully connected graph.
Training such a network would require a long time, and it is
likely computationally infeasible to use this model/replicate
such results over larger areas. In addition, the model only
accounts for the usual spatial and temporal characteristics
of an area without taking into account ﬁre spread patterns.
Peatland Studies
We have surveyed literature within the general peatland do-
main that is potentially relevant to the problem of peatland
ﬁre prediction. Many problems arise in characterizing the
peatland biome. First, it can be difﬁcult to determine which
land is peatland. DeLancey et al. (2019) predict where peat-
lands exist by using machine learning and boosted decision
trees. Mahdianpari et al. (2018) classify wetlands as being
peat-based or not by using a convolutional neural network
model. Second, the peatlands have various characteristics
that might be useful as covariates in ﬁre prediction. Prior
work on these elements focus on identifying the type of
peatlands (Bourgeau-Chavez et al., 2017), the amount of
sequestered carbon stored in the peat (Minasny et al., 2018),
peatlands affected by permafrost (Hugelius et al., 2020), the
acidity of the peatlands (Widyatmanti et al., 2019), identify-
ing human draining around peatlands (Connolly and Holden,
2017), or the water table depth of the peatlands (Kalacska
et al., 2018) using various remote-sensing datasets, statisti-
cal methods, or basic machine learning models.Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Peatland Fire Prediction
Within the peatlands domain, there has only been a handful
of studies in ﬁre prediction, and far fewer that leverage
deep-learning methods.
Honma et al. (2016); Listyorini and Rahim (2018) use a
system of detectors near a speciﬁc peatland to predict ﬁre
spread. Bourgeau-Chavez et al. (2020a) perform a review
of four ﬁres in peatlands to determine how the type of a
peatland affects its likelihood of burning (Bourgeau-Chavez
et al., 2020b). However, these works have limited scalability
since they are either restricted to areas in which they can
establish a detection system or are restricted to post-event
analysis.
Sitanggang et al. (2014) apply decision trees to determine
active ﬁre area, with their best model reaching an accuracy
of 71.66%. However, this model does not perform any
forward predictions; it predicts MODIS hot spots based
upon the conditions of that very day. This work therefore
shows that hot spots can be correlated with various climate
and landscape information such as soil moisture, vegetation
type, and precipitation.
Maulana et al. (2019) use logistic regression to predict ac-
tive ﬁre areas up to three months in advance, achieving an
accuracy of 85.16%. The authors average climate and land-
scape conditions for four months to predict MODIS ﬁre hot
spots aggregated for one month.
Lozhkin et al. (2016) use a differential neural network model
to predict carbon monoxide dispersion from peat ﬁres near
highways. This research suggests the ability of neural net-
works to capture peat emissions patterns.
Appendix II: Dataset
Feature Processing: The time range of our dataset is from
January 20, 2012 to December 31, 2018, which is the in-
tersection of the available time ranges for the different fea-
tures. We use the following South/North/West/East coor-
dinates to bound the map for each feature: -141.0000 °/-
50.0000 °/41.7500 °/90.0000 °. The maps are explicitly
projected to WGS84 (EPSG: 4326), the standard longi-
tude/latitude coordinate system. As each dataset has a differ-
ent spatial resolution, they are all scaled to have a resolution
of 0.1 °x 0.1 °longitude/latitude per pixel, such that each
feature at a timestamp has dimensions of 483 by 910 pixels.
We take timestamps per day. For features with a sub-daily
resolution, we take the average over sub-daily data points.
For features that do not change over time, such as TOCC
from the Tarnocai dataset, we simply reuse the same data
for each timestamp.
Additional Predicted Feature Processing: For prediction,
we mask the predicted features, ﬁre occurrence or CO 2emis-sions, with the Tarnocai Peatland shapeﬁles to get only the
values over peatlands; we do not do this for the covariates.
A polygon in the Tarnocai Peatland Map is considered to be
peatland if it has at least 10% peatland cover as speciﬁed
byPEATLAND P. A polygon in CWFIS is considered to
be burned if it is estimated 100% burned as given by the
BURNCLAS feature.
We list features we considered interesting from the following
datasets, whether they were eventually used or not.
1.Tarnocai Peatland Map (Tarnocai et al.,
2011a)(Tarnocai et al., 2011b)(Tarnocai et al.,
2011c)
A set of shapeﬁles capturing where the peatlands are,
what type (bog, fen, swamp marsh) they are, and
how much carbon they store. The data was gathered
through survey and published by National Resources
Canada.
(a) Spatial Range: Canada
(b) Variables:
i.Peatland (%) ( PEATLAND P): Percentage of
shapeﬁle polygon covered in peatland.
ii.BOGPCT: Percentage of shapeﬁle polygon
covered in bog.
iii.FENPCT: Percentage of shapeﬁle polygon
covered in fen.
iv.SWAMP PCT: Percentage of shapeﬁle poly-
gon covered in swap.
v.MARSH PCT: Percentage of shapeﬁle poly-
gon covered in marsh.
vi.TOCC : The average amount of carbon stored
per surface area (kg/m2) for the shapeﬁle poly-
gon (uses peat depth).
2.Canadian Wildland Fire Information System (CWFIS)
(Service, b)(Service, a)
Shapeﬁles indicating where ﬁres occurred and their
burned areas. Data on ﬁres was collected through sur-
vey by Canadian ﬁre management agencies. Data on
burned area was calculated through a combination of
survey data, aerial photography, and satellite data, such
as from through MODIS, VIIRS, Landsat, and Sentinel-
2.
(a) Spatial Range: Canada
(b) Temporal Resolution: Daily
(c) Temporal Range: ¡ January 2000 - January 2019
(d) Variables:
i.BURNCLAS : Proportion of land burned for
shapeﬁle polygon. 1: estimated 25% burned,
2: estimated 50% burned, 3: estimated 75%
burned, 4: estimated 100% burned.Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
Features Dataset Spatial Resolution Temporal Resolution
BURNCLASS CWFIS variable daily
height i(foriin[0;10))CarbonTracker (Global) 3°x 2° 3-hourly
fire flux CarbonTracker (Flux) 1°x 1° 3-hourly
fuel flux CarbonTracker (Flux) 1°x 1° 3-hourly
frp VIIRS 375m x 375m daily
confidence VIIRS 375m x 375m daily
bright ti4 VIIRS 375m x 375m daily
TOCC Tarnocai Peatland Map variable ﬁxed
swvli (foriin[1;4]) ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
stli (foriin[1;4]) ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
laihv ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
lailv ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
tp ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
t2m ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
u10 ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
v10 ERA5 0.1° x 0.1° hourly
Table 2. Covariate features used for the prediction of ﬁre. Datasets are presented along with the relevant covariate features, spatial
resolution, and temporal resolution. Spatial resolution indicated with degrees is given by longitude/latitude.
ii. Fire: Shapeﬁle polygons outlining ﬁres.
3. VIIRS
Location of hot spots, which are thermal anomalies
that often indicate ﬁre. The data is gathered by the
VIIRS sensor, onboard the Suomi NPP and NOAA-20
polar-orbiting satellites.
(a) Spatial Range: Global
(b) Spatial Resolution: 375m x 375m
(c) Temporal Range: January 2012 - present
(d) Temporal Resolution: Daily
(e) Variables:
i.frp: Fire radiative power, megawatts.
ii.confidence : Conﬁdence of individual hot
spots. 0: low, 1: nominal, 2: high.
iii.bright ti4: Fire pixel channel I4 bright-
ness temperature (Kelvin).
4.Global Monitoring Laboratory Carbon Tracker
CT2019 Globe (A. R. Jacobson, 2020)
(a)Spatial range: Global (NOTE: During winter time,
high latitude regions are not reliable.)
(b) Spatial resolution: 3° longitude x 2° latitude
(c) Temporal Range : January 2000 - present
(d) Temporal Resolution: 3-hourly
(e) Variables:
i.height i, fori2[0;10): CO 2molar den-
sity at 10 different height levels above the
ground. Refer to Table 1 in Section 6.1 ontheir documentation for the actual heights in
meters.
5.Global Monitoring Laboratory Carbon Tracker
CT2019 Flux (A. R. Jacobson, 2020)
(a)Spatial range: Global (NOTE: During winter time,
high latitude regions are not reliable.)
(b) Spatial resolution: 1° x 1°
(c) Temporal Range: January 2000 - present
(d) Temporal Resolution: 3-hourly
(e) Variables:
i.fire flux : Flux of CO 2attributed to ﬁre.
ii.fuel flux : Flux of CO 2attributed to burn-
ing fossil fuel.
6. ERA5 (Hersbach et al., 2020)
The standard dataset on weather variables, such as
pertaining to soil, precipitation, temperature, and wind.
The data is an assimilation between observations and
modelling of climate.
(a)Spatial Resolution: 9km x 9km regridded for 0.1 °
x 0.1°
(b) Temporal Resolution: hourly
(c)Temporal Range: January 1981 - 3 months before
present
(d) Variables:
i.swvl1 : Soil water level 1. Meters-cubed
water in meters-cubed soil at a depth of 0 - 7
cm from surface.Prediction of Boreal Peatland Fires in Canada using Spatio-Temporal Methods
ii.swvl2 : Soil water level 2. Meters-cubed
water in meters-cubed soil at a depth of 7 - 28
cm from surface.
iii.swvl3 : Soil water level 3. Meters-cubed
water in meters-cubed soil at a depth of 28 -
100 cm from surface.
iv.swvl4 : Soil water level 4. Meters-cubed
water in meters-cubed soil at a depth of 100 -
289 cm from surface.
v.stl1 : Soil temperature level 1. Temperature
of soil in Kelvins at a depth of 0 - 7 cm from
surface.
vi.stl2 : Soil temperature level 2. Temperature
of soil in Kelvins at a depth of 7 - 28 cm from
surface.
vii.stl3 : Soil temperature level 3. Temperature
of soil in Kelvins at a depth of 28 - 100 cm
from surface.
viii.stl4 : Soil temperature level 4. Temperature
of soil in Kelvins at a depth of 100 - 289 cm
from surface.
ix.laihv: Leaf area index, low vegetation.
Surface area of low-lying leaves in meters-
squared over area over area land in meters-
squared. Characterizes the density of low veg-
etation such as crops, marshes, grasses, bogs.
x.lailv: Leaf area index, high vegetation.
Surface area of high-reaching leaves in meters-
squared over area land in meters-squared.
Characterizes the density of high vegetation
such as forests and trees.
xi.tp: Total precipitation. Total amount of water
accumulated over an hour. Given as the depth
in meters the water would have been if spread
evenly over the spatial unit. CAUTION: This
variable is an aggregation and not an average,
so its value describes a very speciﬁc space and
time.
xii.t2m: 2-meter temperature. Temperature (K)
two meters above the surface.
xiii.u10: East-ward component of wind. Positive-
x component of speed (m/s) of wind ten-
meters above surface.
xiv.v10: North-ward component of wind.
Positive-y component of speed (m/s) of wind
ten-meters above surface.