Planetary Scale Monitoring of Urban Growth in High Flood Risk Areas
Christian Clough1Ramesh Nair1Jesus Martinez Manso1Matt George1Gopal Erinjippurath1
Abstract
Climate change is increasing the incidence of
ﬂooding. Many areas in the developing world are
experiencing strong population growth but lack
adequate urban planning. This represents a sig-
niﬁcant humanitarian risk. We explore the use of
high-cadence satellite imagery provided by Planet
(PlanetSpec, 2019) (Planet, 2019) who’s ﬂock of
over one hundred ’Dove’ satellites image the en-
tire earth’s landmass everyday at 3-5m resolution.
We use a deep learning-based computer vision
approach to measure ﬂood-related humanitarian
risk in 5 cities in Africa.
1. Introduction
By 2050, more than two-thirds of the worlds population
will live in cities, with the majority of this growth occurring
in developing countries (United Nations & Social Affairs,
2018). Rapid urbanization in developing countries is often
unplanned and carries substantial risk for critical infrastruc-
ture, public health and clean water provision. More frequent
and severe ﬂooding caused by climate change is further in-
ﬂaming this. National, state, and local government ofﬁcials
need access to a new suite of tools to better plan their cities.
Proper measurement and monitoring enables e.g. better
resource allocation for critical infrastructure, commercial
zoning interventions which increase tax revenue, and make
viable insurance markets that incentivize growth in lower
risk areas.
High cadence geospatial imagery coupled with advances in
Deep learning, offer transformative potential to provide such
tools. Inspired by studies in Africa (Butterﬁeld, 2017) and
(Lall, 2017), we monitor building development in 5 African
cities, and use ﬂood risk data to quantify the humanitarian
risk from ﬂooding.
2. Methodology
Our work ﬂow is shown in Figure 1. Monitoring urban
growth in regions of high ﬂood risk starts with daily optical
imagery produced by Planet. Planet operates the largest
constellation of Earth observation satellites, imaging the
Earths landmass daily at 3-5 meter resolution. To avoidcloudy images, we consume Planets monthly nearly cloud-
free ’basemap’ images compiled from multiple days.
We use a variant of U-Net (O. Ronneberger, 2015) - a deep
learning architecture for semantic segmentation of images,
used widely by the remote sensing community - to map
building footprints in the Planet RGB imagery. The training
dataset is compiled from a globally diverse set of geogra-
phies, seasons, and terrains, which has lead to our model
generalizing well.
(FMGlobal, 2019) provides a global map of high-hazard
ﬂood zones derived from a combination of historic ﬂood
data, hydrology, hydraulic science, and up to date environ-
mental monitoring data from rainfall, snow melt and terrain.
Intersecting the building segmentation masks with the high
ﬂood risk zones enables quantitative urban ﬂood risk analy-
sis.
3. Results
3.1. Change in Building Coverage in 5 Cities
We computed the change in urban area from mid-2017 to
early 2019 (the time of writing) for 5 cities: Addis Ababa
in Ethiopia, Bamako in Mali, Bangui in Central African
Republic, Casablanca in Morocco, and Ouagadougou in
Burkina Faso. We selected cities in Africa with varied cli-
mates and terrains, which intersected high-risk ﬂood zones,
and had low cloud coverage. Table 1 shows the percentage
of the urban area - the area classiﬁed as building by our
model - for each of the 5 cities within high ﬂood risk zones,
as of March 2019. Errors in these values are derived solely
from the Poisson pixel count - in future analyses we will
include additional error terms stemming from geographical
variability. We also show the absolute growth since July
2017, calculated as the difference of the ﬁrst 6 versus the
last 6 monthly area values in the period. In all 5 of the cities
we observe urban growth in high ﬂood risk zones.Planetary Scale Monitoring of Urban Growth in High Flood Risk Areas
Figure 1. Work ﬂow for monitoring urban growth in ﬂood risk regions using daily geospatial imagery
Table 1. Percentage of urban area within high ﬂood risk zones in
March 2019 for 5 African cities. Growth represents the differential
increase from October 2017 to March 2019.
COUNTRY CITY %URBAN FLOOD RISK %GROWTH
C.A.R. B ANGUI 57.01.4 2:52.0
MALI BAMAKO 18.70.2 0:10.3
MOROCCO CASABLANCA 13.70.1 0:30.1
BURKINA FASO OUAGADOUGU 7.00.2 0:30.2
ETHIOPIA ADDIS ABABA 2.10.1 0:60.2
Figure 2. Bangui’s (B) inner city (light blue), outer city (dark
blue), and (C) high ﬂood risk zone in the outer city (red).
3.2. Spatio-temporal Analysis of Bangui
In this section we perform a deeper analysis on Bangui -
the city with the highest proportion of urban area within the
high ﬂood risk zone. Visual inspection of the urban change
map for this city suggested that growth was concentrated in
the city outskirts. Thus, we conduct a comparative analysis
between the inner and outer city. We took the Administrative
Level 4 city boundary (HumData, 2016) to deﬁne the inner
city. We deﬁned the outer city as 5km buffer beyond the
inner city-limit (Figure 2 (A)). The outer city area was
intersected with the high risk ﬂood area map (Figure 2 (C)).
For the outer city we plotted urban area for every month
from October 2017 to March 2019 (Figure 4 (A)), andmeasured change by taking the mean of the ﬁrst and last
6 months in the period. As expected the growth observed
was larger in the outskirts than in the city area as a whole in
Table 1, with a growth of 9.1 %. The majority of the urban
area detected was within the high risk ﬂood area in March
2019 (65.2 %). We further observed that the urban area in
the high ﬂood risk zone grew by 7.9 %, over the period of
study. Note: the months of July, August, September in 2017,
and August and September in 2018 were removed due to
high cloud cover.
4. Conclusion
Using automated analysis of up-to-date satellite imagery
we quantiﬁed urban area growth in 5 cities in Africa. We
found that alarmingly large areas of these cities were in
high ﬂood risk zones, and that these areas were growing.
Our approach can be applied to address growing ﬂood risks
driven by climate change. In particular,
High temporal cadence results enables analysis of
trends on shorter timescales than previously possible.
The spatial resolution of this imagery allows for aggre-
gation across multiple dimensions, including correla-
tion with external ﬂood risk maps and separation of
inner urban cores from city outskirts.
The global availability of satellite imagery, and power
of deep learning-based models which generalize across
diverse terrain, mean this approach can be applied
across widely varied environments, at planetary scale.Planetary Scale Monitoring of Urban Growth in High Flood Risk Areas
Figure 3. Change in urban area 2017-2019 for 5 cities in Africa. Top row, satellite images of each city from March 2019, overlaid with
city extent and high ﬂood risk area. Middle row, U-Net building segmentation maps. Bottom row, Change in buildings 10/2017-03/2019,
aggregated at a 0.5km2spatial grid, intersected with high ﬂood risk area showing growth ’hot spots’.
Figure 4. Urban area measurements within Bangui’s outskirts. Left, Urban area plotted monthly for 15 months 10/2017-03/2019. Note:
total city area is 410km2. Right, break down within the outer city of high and low ﬂood risk areas. Error values are the standard error.Planetary Scale Monitoring of Urban Growth in High Flood Risk Areas
References
Butterﬁeld, R. Inspiring climate action in africas cities.
In Langley, P. (ed.), Fractal Working Paper 2017 , pp.
1207–1216. SEI Loccal Gorverments for Sustainability,
2017.
FMGlobal. Global ﬂood map: A revolution in ﬂood map-
ping technology, 2019.
HumData. Central african republic administrative level 0,
1, 2, 3, and bangui level 4 boundary polgyons and lines.
Technical report, HumData.org, 2016.
Lall, S. V . Africa’s cities : Opening doors to the world. Tech-
nical report, Washington, DC: World Bank, Washington,
DC, 2017.
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. B. U-net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation. Proceedings
of MICCAI 2015 , 2015.
Planet. Planet labs homepage https://www.planet.com/,
2019.
PlanetSpec. Planet labs imagery product speciﬁcation. Tech-
nical report, Planet Labs Inc, San Francisco, CA, 2019.
United Nations, D. o. E. and Social Affairs, P. D. World ur-
banization prospects: The 2018 revision, online edition.,
2018.
*Equal contribution1Planet Labs Inc, San Francisco, Cal-
ifornia, USA. Correspondence to: Christian Clough <chris-
tian.clough@planet.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).