Forecasting emissions through Kaya identity
using Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
Pierre Browne1Aranildo R. Lima2Rossella Arcucci1C´esar Quilodr ´an1
Abstract
Starting from the Kaya identity, we used a Neu-
ral ODE model to predict the evolution of sev-
eral indicators related to carbon emissions, on a
country-level: population, GDP per capita, energy
intensity of GDP, carbon intensity of energy. We
compared the model with a baseline statistical
model - V AR - and obtained good performances.
We conclude that this machine-learning approach
can be used to produce a wide range of results
and give relevant insight to policymakers.
1. Introduction
Lowering human greenhouse gases emissions is one major
goal of the efforts against climate change, and the focus
and concern of international cooperation (Paris Agreement,
2015). Many indicators of human development - population,
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), environmental footprint
- have been following exponential curves during the past
decades (Steffen et al., 2015); hence, drastic measures are
needed if we are to switch from increasing to quickly de-
creasing emissions, as expressed in global organisations
goals (IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (2014)).
Understanding and forecasting the evolution, on a country-
scale, of various indicators related to carbon emissions, may
help to give a clear idea of the progress we are making, or
not, towards lower emissions. The main indicators that we
chose to study are the variables appearing in Kaya identity
(Kaya & Yokoburi, 1997), on a country level: population,
national GDP, energy supply and CO2 emissions.
Our main objective is to develop a model able to use this data
to make accurate forecasts, on a medium/long-time horizon.
Machine-learning models offer interesting advantages in
comparison of traditional methods used for this type of
*Equal contribution1Department of Computing, Impe-
rial College, London, United Kingdom2Aquatic Informat-
ics, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to: Pierre Browne
<pierre.browne20@imperial.ac.uk >.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning Workshop at
ICML 2021.work, typically statistical models (Cerqueira et al., 2019).
In particular, the recent development of Neural Ordinary
Differential Equations offers a promising perspective in this
case (Chen et al., 2019) - we explain the reasons for this
choice in 3.2. We adapted Neural ODEs for this problem
and compared the performance with a baseline statistical
model.
2. Kaya identity & impact on climate change
The Kaya identity expresses a very simple relation between
carbon emissions F, energy supply E, Gross Domestic Prod-
uct (GDP) Gand population P:F=PG
PE
GF
E.
G
Pis the GDP per capita, representing our average life stan-
dard, which we generally want to increase;E
Gis the energy
intensity of the GDP - the energy needed to create one unit
of GDP -, it quantiﬁes the efﬁciency of energy usage in our
activities;E
Fis the carbon intensity of energy - the CO2
emission corresponding to the supply of one unit of primary
energy - and indicates how reliant on carbon emissions our
electricity production is.
Forecasting human development and carbon emissions is
possible both with the set of raw variables fP; G; E; Fg
and with the set of indicators appearing in the Kaya identity
fP;G
P;E
G;F
Eg. However, the latter gives a clearer analy-
sis, from a macroscopic point of view (Ritchie & Roser,
b). While the raw variables are very strongly correlated
altogether and vary greatly between countries, the variables
from the Kaya equation look more like consistent indica-
tors actionable under the right choice of policies (Hwang
et al., 2020). Overall, using these four indicators seems to
be a good choice in order to assess efforts made by a coun-
try or region concerning carbon emissions ( ˇStreimikien ˙e &
Balezentis, 2016).
3. Methodology
3.1. Datasets
Four datasets were used for this study: datasets for popula-
tion (World Bank, 2020b) and GDP (World Bank, 2020a)
were collected from the World Bank Open Data platform;
the total energy supply (IEA, 2020a) and the CO2 emis-Forecasting emissions through Kaya identity using Neural ODEs
sions from fuel combustion (IEA, 2020b) were extracted
from public datasets from the International Energy Agency.
It should be noted that this is not the total emission for
each country - however, greenhouse gases emitted by fuel
combustion represent around 75% of all greenhouse gases
emissions (Ritchie & Roser, a). Each variable is available
yearly, from 1971 to 2019, for at least 54 countries.
3.2. Motivations for a machine-learning approach
In the domain of energy and emissions, forecasts are often
relying on expert knowledge and statistical models (York
et al., 2003; Auffhammer & Steinhauser, 2008); an exten-
sive set of Integrated Assessment Models are used to ex-
plore how system Earth evolves during the next decades,
following speciﬁc scenarios (IPCC Fifth Assessment Report
(2014)), (Lucas et al., 2015). In other ﬁelds, grey models
(Deng, 1989) have been used successfully to model future
emissions, linking with population, GDP and energy supply
(Pao et al., 2012).
In some cases, black-box, data-driven models give good per-
formances in comparison with traditional models (Rehman
et al., 2017). Here, the problem naturally appears as a multi-
variate time-series forecasting problem, for which machine-
learning already offers an extensive toolbox (Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber, 1997; Chung et al., 2014).
Here, the variables that we are trying to predict are physical
values, that may be independent, or follow a simple or com-
plex relationship (Hwang et al., 2020). Since we may lack
understanding of the physical system, a black-box model
comes with the advantage of sparing the risk of making
wrong hypotheses. In addition, even if the individual time
series are only 50 years long, the dataset comprises a large
set of countries to train a model with. Hopefully, a suitable
machine-learning model would beneﬁt from the variety of
countries and produce more satisfying results training on
several countries (5.1).
3.3. Neural ODEs
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Chen et al., 2019)
are a type of models recently brought into the spotlight.
The model learns the dynamics of a system with a neural
network: if X(t)is a state vector obeying dynamics of
the shapedX
dt=f(X; t), the network must approximate f.
NODEs work together with a Differential Equation solver,
and were presented with a practical method to compute a
loss and back-propagate its gradient. Since the architecture
of the neural network is entirely free, a NODE model can
be used for very different problems.
In our case, NODEs offer a good extrapolation capacity, al-
lowing us to make long-time forecasts. Since they naturally
model a vector ﬁeld representing the evolution of a physical
Figure 1. Boxplots of performances on 15 countries. Vstands for
V AR model, Nstands for NODE model, the number corresponds to
the forecast length, in years. We manually tuned some parameters.
All models were trained for the same number of epochs, using
Adam optimiser.
system, we hope that such a model can capture the complex
physical pattern existing between the forecast indicators. In
addition, several countries could help the model to represent
the dynamics more accurately. Finally, a NODE model can
handle sporadic data (not regularly sampled), both in time
and across dimensions (Brouwer et al., 2019) - although
not required with our original dataset, this property may
become relevant for this problem (5.2).
4. Forecasting results
We used a NODE model to forecast the evolution of 7 vari-
ables, for each country. Apart from the 4 indicators from
Kaya identity (population, GDP per capita, energy intensity
of the GDP, carbon intensity of the energy), we added 3 vari-
ables representing how electricity is produced: proportion of
electricity produced via fossil fuels combustion, via nuclear
power or via renewable sources. The last 3 variables remain
in[0;1]at all time, and sum up to 1. Our model wraps a
very simple neural network (one hidden layer), which takes
8inputs ( 7variables plus time) and outputs 7values (the 7
variables derivatives). We also tried deeper architectures ;
without clear evidence of better performances on this simple
case, we kept the simplest model for performance evalua-
tion. We used an Adam optimisation strategy (Kingma &
Ba, 2017).
As a ﬁrst step, we ran the model for each country individu-
ally, dividing the rime range [1971; 2019] in a training set
(earlier dates) and validation set (latest dates). We compared
the NODE model with a very simple statistical Vector Au-
toregression model (V AR model), which can typically be
used for multivariate time-series problems (Liu et al., 2018).
To quantify performances, we computed the mean squared
error on the validation set for a set of 15 European countries,
for both models; ﬁgure 1 reports these results using boxplots.
This was done for several forecast lengths. In particular, the
table indicates that NODE models really shine for long-
time horizons, while for very short forecasts V AR performs
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICML 2021Forecasting emissions through Kaya identity using Neural ODEs
Figure 2. Example of forecasts obtained from a NODE model (red) versus a V AR model (green) ; training set is France data between 1971
and 2008, validation set is data between 2008 and 2020 (12-years forecast).
better; NODE models also give more stable performances
- lower variance - when the forecast length increases. In
addition, ﬁgure 2 presents a typical output of our NODE
model, compared with forecasts from a V AR model.
5. Conclusion & next steps
According to our results, Neural ODEs give overall good
performances compared with V AR models, especially for
long-time horizons. This justiﬁes our approach as a reason-
able method to forecast emissions in the long term. Through
a data-driven model only, without expert knowledge, this
process would hopefully learn from present and past pat-
terns in the evolution of indicators from the Kaya identity,
in order to give more accurate insight to policymakers.
5.1. Multi-country training
One of the motivations for a machine-learning solution to
this problem is the perspective of beneﬁting from training
the same model on several countries data. We started from
the assumption that countries with similar proﬁles - e.g.
same continent, same economic system, etc. - should have
their forecast indicators obey the same hidden law; in other
words, the system dynamics should be identical for these
countries (Otto et al., 2001; Martin, 2015). If this hypothesis
is true, crossing data from these countries allows to train the
model on more samples0 and, hopefully, the trained model
will be more robust and able to forecast a broader set of
behaviours.
In the present state, we need to rethink how our model is able
to distinguish different countries. With the normalisation
process used so far, it was sometimes impossible for the
model to tell that time-series come from different sources,
with the output being just an average of all the observed
trajectories. One possibility for this type of issue is to add
meta-information about the data source, as additional inputs
to the neural network (Kratzert et al., 2019). In our case, as
ﬁrst idea, we added country encoding as an input (one-hotencoding). This led to better forecasts, but work remains to
be done in this direction ; we made preliminary experiments
on deeper networks, which might also help.
5.2. Scenario modelling
A major prospect and objective of our study is the modelling
of particular scenarios with this machine-learning approach:
if we believe that our model has captured correctly the inter-
actions between the forecast indicators, it is desirable to be
able to explore particular possible futures (Moss et al., 2008;
O’Neill et al., 2014). This is a common idea when studying
mitigation against climate change, and allows to make the
connection between public policies, global effort, and actual
effect on climate change (Moyer & Hedden, 2020). Here,
interesting scenarios could model how emissions forecast
change if the electricity production shifts towards more nu-
clear or renewable energy; or study trajectories that allow
to meet national or international goals on emissions reduc-
tions; or model the impact of a crisis such as Covid-19 on
long-term energy supply and emissions.
We envisioned two ways to incorporate scenarios to our
NODE model - in both cases, we train the model beforehand.
First, we could provide the model with a full, hypothetical
trajectory for one indicator - the chosen scenario -, and
forecast all other indicators. Hopefully, the model would
take advantage of its training experience to output relevant
correlations. Second, we could add after training one or
several ”hypothetical observations” to the training set, for
future dates - the chosen scenario - ; we would then train
the model for a few more epochs on the augmented training
set, expecting the model to adapt its forecasts to the new
observations, while keeping the structure it has acquired
during the ﬁrst training. A simple way to verify this idea
would be to provide the model with observations from the
validation set, and to examine if the performance on the
validation set increases signiﬁcantly after the additional
training. Further work is required to assess if this approach
can lead to consistent results.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICML 2021Forecasting emissions through Kaya identity using Neural ODEs
References
Auffhammer, M. and Steinhauser, R. A Framework for
Forecasting the Path of US CO2 Emissions Using State-
Level Information. Review of Economics and Statistics ,
94, 05 2008.
Brouwer, E. D., Simm, J., Arany, A., and Moreau, Y .
GRU-ODE-Bayes: Continuous modeling of sporadically-
observed time series. arXiv , abs/1905.12374, 2019.
Cerqueira, V ., Torgo, L., and Soares, C. Machine Learning
vs Statistical Methods for Time Series Forecasting: Size
Matters. arXiv , abs/1909.13316, 2019.
Chen, R. T. Q., Rubanova, Y ., Bettencourt, J., and Duve-
naud, D. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations. arXiv ,
abs/1806.07366, 2019.
Chung, J., Gulcehre, C., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y . Empiri-
cal Evaluation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on
Sequence Modeling. arXiv , abs/1412.3555, 2014.
Core Writing Team and R. K. Pachauri and L. A. Meyer
(eds.). Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Con-
tribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Technical report, Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland,
151 pp., 2014.
Deng, J. L. Introduction to grey system theory. Journal of
Grey System , 1(1):1–24, 1989.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long Short-term Mem-
ory.Neural computation , 9:1735–80, 12 1997.
Hwang, Y ., Um, J.-S., Hwang, J., and Schlueter, S. Evaluat-
ing the causal relations between the kaya identity index
and odiac-based fossil fuel co2 ﬂux. Energies , 13:6009,
11 2020.
IEA. World Energy Balances (database),
2020a. URL https://www.iea.org/
data-and-statistics/data-product/
world-energy-balances-highlights . All
rights reserved ; as modiﬁed by [anonymous].
IEA. CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion, 2020b. URL
https://www.iea.org/
data-and-statistics/data-product/
co2-emissions-from-fuel-combustion
-highlights
All rights reserved ; as modiﬁed by [anonymous].
Kaya, Y . and Yokoburi, K. Environment, energy, and econ-
omy : strategies for sustainability. United Nations Univ.
Press, 1997.Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv , abs/1412.6980, 2017.
Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Shalev, G., Klambauer, G., Hochre-
iter, S., and Nearing, G. Towards learning universal,
regional, and local hydrological behaviors via machine
learning applied to large-sample datasets. Hydrology and
Earth System Sciences , 23:5089–5110, 12 2019.
Liu, Y ., Roberts, M., and Sioshansi, R. A vector autoregres-
sion weather model for electricity supply and demand
modeling. Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean
Energy , 6, 01 2018.
Lucas, P. L., Nielsen, J., Calvin, K., L. McCollum, D.,
Marangoni, G., Streﬂer, J., van der Zwaan, B. C., and van
Vuuren, D. P. Future energy system challenges for Africa:
Insights from Integrated Assessment Models. Energy
Policy , 86:705–717, 2015. ISSN 0301-4215.
Martin, T. Are Worldwide Economies Correlated
?, 2015. URL https://www.shorttails.io/
are-worldwide-economies-correlated/ .
Moss, R., Nakicenovic, N., and O’Neill, B. Towards New
Scenarios for Analysis of Emissions, Climate Change,
Impacts, and Response Strategies . IPCC, Geneva, 2008.
Moyer, J. D. and Hedden, S. Are we on the right path
to achieve the sustainable development goals? World
Development , 127:104749, 2020. ISSN 0305-750X.
Otto, G., V oss, G., and Willard, L. Understanding OECD
Output Correlations. RBA Research Discussion Papers
rdp2001-05, Reserve Bank of Australia, September 2001.
O’Neill, B., Kriegler, E., Riahi, K., Ebi, K., Hallegatte, S.,
Carter, T., Mathur, R., and Vuuren, D. A New Scenario
Framework for Climate Change Research: The Concept
of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Climatic Change ,
122, 02 2014.
Pao, H.-T., Fu, H.-C., and Tseng, C.-L. Forecasting of CO2
emissions, energy consumption and economic growth in
China using an improved grey model. Energy , 40(1):
400–409, 2012. ISSN 0360-5442.
Rehman, H., Raﬁque, R., Jat, M., and Zahid Chudhery, M.
Forecasting CO2 Emissions from Energy, Manufacturing
and Transport Sectors in Pakistan: Statistical Vs. Machine
Learning Methods. SSRN Electronic Journal , 01 2017.
Ritchie, H. and Roser, M. Emissions by sec-
tor, a. URL https://ourworldindata.org/
emissions-by-sector .
Ritchie, H. and Roser, M. Emissions drivers,
b. URL https://ourworldindata.org/
emissions-drivers .
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICML 2021Forecasting emissions through Kaya identity using Neural ODEs
Steffen, W., Broadgate, W., Deutsch, L., Gaffney, O., and
Ludwig, C. The trajectory of the Anthropocene: The
Great Acceleration. The Anthropocene Review , 2:81–98,
2015.
World Bank. GDP (current US $) — data, 2020a. URL
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
NY.GDP.MKTP.CD .
World Bank. Population, total — data, 2020b. URL
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
SP.POP.TOTL .
York, R., Rosa, A. E., and Dietz, T. STIRPAT, IPAT and
ImPACT: analytic tools for unpacking the driving forces
of environmental impacts. Ecological Economics , 46(3):
351–365, 2003. ISSN 0921-8009.
ˇStreimikien ˙e, D. and Balezentis, T. Kaya identity for analy-
sis of the main drivers of GHG emissions and feasibility
to implement EU “20–20–20” targets in the Baltic States.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 58:1108–
1113, 2016. ISSN 1364-0321.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at ICML 2021