DeepPolicyTracker : Tracking Changes In Environmental Policy In The
Brazilian Federal Ofﬁcial Gazette With Deep Learning
Fl´avio Nakasato Cac ¸ ˜ao1Anna Helena Reali Costa1Natalie Unterstell2Liuca Yonaha2Taciana Stec2
F´abio Ishisaki2
Abstract
Even though most of its energy generation comes
from renewable sources, Brazil is one of the
largest emitters of greenhouse gases in the world,
due to intense farming and deforestation of
biomes such as the Amazon Rainforest, whose
preservation is essential for compliance with the
Paris Agreement. Still, regardless of lobbies or
prevailing political orientation, all government
legal actions are published daily in the Federal Of-
ﬁcial Gazette. However, with hundreds of decrees
issued every day by the authorities, it is absolutely
burdensome to manually analyze all these pro-
cesses and ﬁnd out which ones can pose serious
environmental hazards. In this paper, we propose
the DeepPolicyTracker, a promising deep learn-
ing model that uses a state-of-the-art pretrained
natural language model to classify government
acts and track changes in the environmental poli-
cies. We also provide the used dataset annotated
by domain experts and show some results already
obtained. In the future, this system should serve
to scale up the high-quality tracking of all oﬁcial
documents with a minimum of human supervision
and contribute to increasing society’s awareness
of every government action.
1. Introduction
Brazil has one of the largest reserves of biodiversity in the
world, such as the Amazon rainforest, Cerrado and Atlantic
forest. The preservation of these biomes is essential for the
country to be able to fulﬁll the objectives of the Paris Agree-
ment (Rochedo et al., 2018), since 78% of greenhouse gas
emissions in Brazil come from land use and cover change
(West et al., 2019). In 2020, while global emissions fell as
1Polytechnic School, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil
2Pol´ıtica por Inteiro, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Correspondence to: Fl ´avio
Nakasato Cac ¸ ˜ao<ﬂavio.cacao@usp.br >.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning Workshop at
ICML 2021.a result of the coronavirus pandemic, in Brazil they grew
substantially driven by deforestation and farming (Spring,
2020); the Amazon Rainforest deforestation rate was the
greatest of the decade (Silva Junior et al., 2021). At the
same time, the country is an agribusiness powerhouse, with
26.6% of the GDP related to it (CEPEA-ESALQ, 2021) and
is governed by a president who did not hide his intentions to
weaken current environmental policies (Nature, 2018). In
this complex environment, it is extremely important, and it
is a high leverage strategy, to be able to track the acts issued
by the government, in order to alert and empower civil so-
ciety with qualiﬁed and clear information (Rolnick et al.,
2019). However, as noted in (Grimmer & Stewart, 2013),
this is an arduous task for manual work alone: hundreds
of highly technical documents are issued every day by the
Congress and the Executive branches.
Therefore, these issues represent an opportunity for the most
recent models that automate the natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. Pretrained language models have started to
become popular in recent years and have set new quality
standards in virtually all NLP tasks such as classiﬁcation,
translating and question answering. They have millions or
billions of parameters and are built upon the Transformer
architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017). These models are pre-
trained in a self-supervised way over huge databases, like the
entire Wikipedia, and then they can be used to solve other
language problems, with ﬁne-tunings in smaller domain-
speciﬁc datasets. The result obtained in general is much
superior when compared to a model trained solely on the
smaller dataset (Raffel et al., 2020).
In this work, we contribute with the DeepPolicyTracker
model, an approach to classify federal government acts
using a state-of-the-art NLP technique, called BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2019), which is a bidirectional encoder architec-
ture. In order to ﬁne-tune this architecture to our speciﬁc
scope, a preliminary dataset was prepared where thousands
of documents were initially pre-classiﬁed and ﬁltered by
a rule-based robot and then reviewed and enriched under
the supervision of domain experts. It is noteworthy that
the system formed only by the rule-based robot followed
by a layer of human supervision today feeds one of theDeepPolicyTracker: Tracking Changes In Environmental Policy In The Brazilian Federal Ofﬁcial Gazette With Deep Learning
Figure 1. The operational ﬂow of the data pipeline. A rule-based robot scrapes and pre-classiﬁes all ofﬁcial documents released every
day (step a), and loads them into a general database (step b). The most relevant acts related to the environment are sent to a team of
domain experts (step c), who manually reviews the robot’s classiﬁcations and enriches the database with new information. Errors found
by annotators are regularly used to improve the rule-based robot (step d). This ﬁltered and veriﬁed subset of data is loaded into the
Government Actions Tracker database (step e), which is used to ﬁne-tune the BERT classiﬁcation model. This model receives a Context
variable for each document and is ﬁne-tuned to classiﬁes it as a Regulation/Deregulation or Regulation/Deregulation/Neutral action (step
g). The system over the gray area represents the Pol ´ıtica Por Inteiro’s system currently deployed in production.
largest newspapers in the country with daily monitoring of
acts by the Brazilian government that may have negative
consequences for the preservation of the country’s native
forests and wildlife1. Thanks to this, it was possible to
identify massive repeals of protection laws moved by the
Federal Government in 2020, with the potential increase
in deforestation2. We hope that our new proposal with the
deep learning BERT module can give greater efﬁciency and
effectiveness to this task.
In the next sections, we will cover the construction strategy
of the dataset used for training the BERT network, as well
as the conﬁgurations used in its training.
1The Environmental Policy Monitor can be accessed
here: https://arte.folha.uol.com.br/ambiente/
monitor-politica-ambiental
2A newspaper article reporting this can be found here:
https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/ambiente/
2020/07/governo-acelerou-canetadas-sobre-
meio-ambiente-durante-a-pandemia.shtml2. Methods
2.1. Data Preparation
Every morning, a robot scrapes all documents published
in the Federal Ofﬁcial Gazette3and pre-classiﬁes them un-
der “Themes”, based on rules deﬁned by domain experts
and reﬁned over the years. These rules are based mainly
on keywords and more complex expressions to include or
exclude a document from a given theme. So far, there are
23 possible themes like Climate Change ,Amazon Region
andEnvironmental Disasters . All ofﬁcial document data is
transformed and loaded into a database. This is illustrated
in Figure 1.
The most relevant documents ﬁltered by the robot are also
sent to a separate ﬁle, where, every day, two specialists
jointly review them and annotated an Action , aCircumstance
and a Classiﬁcation ﬁelds for each record, besides some
more useful metadata. An Action refers to the legal action
deﬁned by the document, while a Circumstance usually
3The ofﬁcial documents of the federal government, originally
in PDF, are also published in a machine readable format – in this
case, XML. These are the ﬁles processed by the robot.DeepPolicyTracker: Tracking Changes In Environmental Policy In The Brazilian Federal Ofﬁcial Gazette With Deep Learning
carries more details about the action taken. Both are, for the
most part, only extracted from the original document with
minimal adjustments, and concatenated into a new variable
Context we created to feed the BERT model. Regarding
theClassiﬁcation ﬁeld, domain experts deﬁned 12 classes,
described below:
•Regulation: Action that seeks to institute a rule or
norm by the public administration, giving guidelines
and producing guidance to economic agents;
•Deregulation: Action that seeks to revoke and/or re-
verse a previously established regulation, change its
understanding or orientation;
•Institutional reform: Change in structure, skills and
institutional arrangement related to public policy;
•Response: Action that aims to respond to a signiﬁcant
external event, such as a natural disaster or a major
accident;
•Flexibilization: Alteration, temporary or not, of dead-
lines or conditions for compliance with environmental
rules, norms and legislation;
•Neutral: Action with no signiﬁcant impact when con-
sidered in isolation, but cataloging assessed as neces-
sary because it addresses topics on relevant agendas or
with indications of becoming relevant in the medium
and long terms;
•Retreat: Action that seeks to revoke, replace or modify
previously established regulations, due to political or
popular pressure;
•Law consolidation: Result of regulatory review, with
no impact on content;
•Revocation: Batch revisions or acts associated with
the full revision process;
•Privatization: Action that seeks the alienation of busi-
ness rights under the competence of the Union; the
transfer, to the private sector, of the execution of public
services operated by the Union; or the transfer or grant
of rights over movable and immovable property of the
Union;
•Legislation: Action that seeks to agree a new law be-
fore society, giving guidelines and providing guidance
to economic agents;
•Planning: Action that does not institute regulatory
processes per se, but discloses documents and guiding
strategies, such as management plans, creation of com-
mittees and working groups, approval of programs and
policies that have not yet been deﬁned, among others.Misclassiﬁcations found by the annotators are also used
regularly to reﬁne the rule-based robot.
After the human supervision stage, the veriﬁed and enriched
data are sent to a separate database, the Government Actions
Tracker database4. Our main contribution is the ﬁne-tune
of a BERTimbau Base model, a pretrained BERT model
in Portuguese with 12 layers and 110 million parameters
(Souza et al., 2020), on the Government Actions Tracker
database to predict the class of a document in the Classiﬁ-
cation ﬁeld given the Context variable created. Since the
current process requires the evaluation of human experts,
a more effective classiﬁcation system could eliminate the
need for human supervision in the vast majority of cases,
allowing their efforts to be redirected to new challenges, and
dramatically scaling the model’s tracking capability.
2.2. Experiment Description
Due to the small size of the database, the training with the
original 12 classes proved to be very unstable. Thus, we
regrouped the previous classes of the Classiﬁcation variable
into two training settings:
•With three major classes:
– Regulation: Regulation, Planning and Response
– Neutral: Neutral, Retreat and Legislation
– Deregulation: Privatization, Deregulation, Flexi-
bilization, Institutional reform, Law consolidation
and Revocation
•With only two major classes:
– Regulation: Regulation, Planning, Response,
Neutral, Retreat and Legislation
– Deregulation: Privatization, Deregulation, Flexi-
bilization, Institutional reform, Law consolidation
and Revocation
We obtained better and more stable results with a batch
size of 8, a maximum input sequence length of 200 and a
learning rate of 5e-5. Data were shufﬂed and splitted into
training (80%), validation (10%) and test (10%), and the test
set was isolated to prevent data leakage. Balancing classes
by assigning different weights also showed no signiﬁcant
improvement.
3. Results
The Table 1 summarizes the Matthews Correlation Coefﬁ-
cient (MCC) and the Accuracy (Acc) results obtained for
4Due to the curatorial process involved, this database (which
is made available at https://github.com/nakasato/
deeppolicytracker ) today has around one thousand in-
stances, while the complete database has almost 700 thousand
– both increase every day.DeepPolicyTracker: Tracking Changes In Environmental Policy In The Brazilian Federal Ofﬁcial Gazette With Deep Learning
Figure 2. Confusion matrices and ROC curves generated by the models a) with 2 classes (0: Regulation , 1:Deregulation ) and b) with 3
classes (0: Regulation , 1:Neutral , 2:Deregulation ).
Table 1. Summary of the Matthews Correlation Coefﬁcient (MCC) and Accuracy (Acc) results on the test set for the two types of
classiﬁcation, with 2 and 3 classes.
TARGET MCC A CC PROPORTION OF EACH CLASS .
CLASSIFICATION (2CLASSES ) 0.61 0.84 R EGULATION (68.7%), D EREGULATION (31.3%)
CLASSIFICATION (3CLASSES ) 0.57 0.74 R EGULATION (49.3%), N EUTRAL (19.4%), D EREGULATION (31.3%)
the two types of rearrangements, one with the original 12
Classiﬁcation classes aggregated in only 2 groups, and the
other with them aggregated in 3 groups. Figure 2 shows
the confusion matrices and the ROC curves generated in
each case. All the presented results were obtained on the
test set. Considering the proportions of each class in each
experiment, one can see that the DeepPolicyTracker model
is promising, despite the challenges of dealing with an extra
small database for the current standards of the state-of-the-
art pretrained models and also despite of the imbalanced
classes. These results are particularly notable considering
that it is a completely end-to-end system.
4. Conclusion and Future Work
We present the DeepPolicyTracker , a model in progress of
an end-to-end neural system based on state-of-the-art NLP
which aims to track and classify potentially harmful changes
in environmental policies directly from texts in ofﬁcial doc-
uments. Despite the challenges contained in an extra small
base, documents full of jargon and with imbalanced classes,the system shows promising results. Monitoring each act
published by the government in order to inform civil so-
ciety is an extremely challenging task and there is still no
single practical solution to solve it. Whether a rule-based
system working jointly with domain experts already deliver
immeasurable value when it comes to policy monitoring, it
is also paramount that the latest NLP technologies are con-
sidered to increase the scalability and performance of these
systems. Hence, among the future works are the expansion
of the annotated datasets, as well as the improvement of
theDeepPolicyTracker model so it maintains the quality
and stability of the classiﬁcation for a greater number of
classes; to this end, we also intend to test simpler and lighter
machine learning models.
5. Acknowledgments
This work is the result of an academic partnership between
the Polytechnic School of the University of Sao Paulo and
Pol´ıtica Por Inteiro. Without the data curation efforts of
Pol´ıtica Por Inteiro experts, building this model would notDeepPolicyTracker: Tracking Changes In Environmental Policy In The Brazilian Federal Ofﬁcial Gazette With Deep Learning
have been possible. Also, this research was supported by
Ita´u Unibanco S.A. Findings and conclusions expressed here
are the responsibility of the authors.
References
CEPEA-ESALQ. PIB do Agroneg ´ocio Brasileiro - Centro
de Estudos Avan c ¸ados em Economia Aplicada - CEPEA-
Esalq/USP. 2021.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence of the North , volume 1, pp. 4171–4186, Stroudsburg,
PA, USA, 2019. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. ISBN 9781950737130. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-
1423. URL http://aclweb.org/anthology/
N19-1423 .
Grimmer, J. and Stewart, B. M. Text as data: The promise
and pitfalls of automatic content analysis methods for
political texts. Political Analysis , 21(3):267–297, 2013.
ISSN 14764989. doi: 10.1093/pan/mps028.
Nature. Brazil’s sustainability needs social sci-
ences. Nature Sustainability , 1(11):607–607, nov 2018.
ISSN 2398-9629. doi: 10.1038/s41893-018-0183-
0. URL http://www.nature.com/articles/
s41893-018-0183-0 .
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang,
S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y ., Li, W., and Liu, P. J. Ex-
ploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Uniﬁed
Text-to-Text Transformer. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL http://jmlr.
org/papers/v21/20-074.html .
Rochedo, P. R. R., Soares-Filho, B., Schaeffer, R., Vi-
ola, E., Szklo, A., Lucena, A. F. P., Koberle, A.,
Davis, J. L., Raj ˜ao, R., and Rathmann, R. The
threat of political bargaining to climate mitigation in
Brazil. Nature Climate Change , 8(8):695–698, aug
2018. ISSN 1758-678X. doi: 10.1038/s41558-018-0213-
y. URL http://www.nature.com/articles/
s41558-018-0213-y .
Rolnick, D., Donti, P. L., Kaack, L. H., Kochanski, K., La-
coste, A., Sankaran, K., Ross, A. S., Milojevic-Dupont,
N., Jaques, N., Waldman-Brown, A., Luccioni, A., Ma-
haraj, T., Sherwin, E. D., Karthik Mukkavilli, S., Kording,
K. P., Gomes, C., Ng, A. Y ., Hassabis, D., Platt, J. C.,
Creutzig, F., Chayes, J., and Bengio, Y . Tackling cli-
mate change with machine learning. arXiv , 2019. ISSN
23318422.
Silva Junior, C. H., Pess ˆoa, A. C., Carvalho, N. S., Reis,
J. B., Anderson, L. O., and Arag ˜ao, L. E. The Brazil-ian Amazon deforestation rate in 2020 is the greatest of
the decade. Nature Ecology and Evolution , 5(2):144–
145, 2021. ISSN 2397334X. doi: 10.1038/s41559-020-
01368-x. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
s41559-020-01368-x .
Souza, F., Nogueira, R., and Lotufo, R. BERTim-
bau: Pretrained BERT Models for Brazilian Portuguese.
pp. 403–417. 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-61377-
828. URL http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-030-61377-8_28 .
Spring, J. Deforestation boosts Brazil greenhouse gas
emissions as global emissions fall — Reuters, 2020.
URL https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-brazil-environment-emissions-
idUSKBN22X2AA .
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Attention
is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems , 2017-Decem(Nips):5999–6009, 2017. ISSN
10495258.
West, T. A. P., B ¨orner, J., and Fearnside, P. M. Climatic
Beneﬁts From the 2006–2017 Avoided Deforestation
in Amazonian Brazil. Frontiers in Forests and Global
Change , 2(September):1–11, 2019. ISSN 2624-893X.
doi: 10.3389/ffgc.2019.00052.