Using Natural Language Processing to Analyze Financial Climate Disclosures
Alexandra Luccioni1Hector Palacios2
Abstract
According to U.S. ﬁnancial legislation, compa-
nies traded on the stock market are obliged to
regularly disclose risks and uncertainties that are
likely to affect their operations or ﬁnancial po-
sition. Since 2010, these disclosures must also
include climate-related risk projections. These
disclosures therefore present a large quantity of
textual information on which we can apply NLP
techniques in order to pinpoint the companies that
divulge their climate risks and those that do not,
the types of vulnerabilities that are disclosed, and
to follow the evolution of these risks over time.
1. Introduction
In 2010, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) published a guidance regarding the disclosure re-
quirements that companies must comply with relating to
the issue of climate change (U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 2010). This guidance stipulated that com-
panies issuing stocks traded on U.S. markets were legally
obliged to disclose any risks and uncertainties related to
climate change, be it its physical impacts on assets or dis-
tribution chains, its legislative impacts on proﬁt generation,
the international accords affecting prices of raw materials,
and even indirect market consequences such as supply and
demand (Doran & Quinn, 2008).
While this is undoubtedly a step forward in transparency
and accountability, the problem remains that SEC ﬁlings
are hundreds of pages long and ﬁlled with ﬁnancial and
legislative jargon, which makes it hard to pinpoint the pas-
sages, if any, that address climate risk disclosures. In fact, a
2013 study found that of 3,895 U.S. public companies listed
on major stock exchanges, only 27 percent mentioned cli-
mate change explicitly in their annual reports (Hirji, 2013).
However, this study utilized keyword search, which leaves
1Mila, University of Montreal, Canada2Element AI, Mon-
treal, Canada. Correspondence to: Alexandra Luccioni <luccio-
nis@mila.quebec >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).the door open for a more in-depth analysis using Natural
Language Processing (NLP) in order to identify which com-
panies are disclosing various types of climate risk and to
what extent. In our study, we aim to focus on a subset of ma-
jor U.S. companies in order to analyze the extent to which
these companies disclose climate risk, what they divulge,
and how this evolves before and after the 2010 ruling.
2. Methodology
We propose to bootstrap the process of analyzing climate
disclosures by starting with a set of hand-picked keywords,
then automatically expanding the vocabulary to be able to
detect sections in the text that address climate risk. We then
propose to extract information using state-of-the-art NLP
tools from those sections focusing on targeted categories and
concepts. This pipeline both streamlined and transparent to
simplify human intervention for evaluation purposes and to
guarantee the ownership of the analysis afterwards.
For our analysis, we will focus on 10-K reports, which are
publicly available documents that are published on the SEC
website1and that give a comprehensive summary of a com-
pany’s ﬁnancial performance on a yearly basis. While all
companies traded on the stock market can (and eventually,
will) be affected by climate change, we will start with com-
panies from the S&P 500, the largest companies listed on
the U.S. stock markets which represent about 80% of their
total market value. We will focus more speciﬁcally on com-
panies from sectors that are most obviously impacted by
climate change: energy, real estate, oil and gas, utilities, and
materials (Winn et al., 2011), for a total of 115 companies.
We target the ten-year period between 2008 and 2018, to
encompass a time frame before and since the SEC ruling.
This will give us a total of 1150 documents to analyze.
2.1. Identifying Climate Disclosure Sections
Despite the SEC ruling, it is probable that many companies
simply do not explicitly include climate risk disclosures in
their annual ﬁndings. Therefore the ﬁrst challenge of our
work is ﬁnding the relevant sections within the disclosures
that explicitly mention these risks. In order to identify these
passages, we propose to start with a semi-supervised ap-
1https://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtmlUsing NLP to Analyze Climate Disclosures
proach, constructing a climate dictionary from a small set of
seed words selected manually, then automatically expanding
these seed words to build a full-ﬂedged vocabulary. The
eight initial seed words that we propose in our approach
are: biodiversity, carbon, climate, ecology, environment,
emission, pollution, sustainable . Starting with this seed
vocabulary, we propose to take each word and query a 300-
dimensional word embedding model trained on Wikipedia
and the Gigaword corpus (Pennington et al., 2014) to gen-
erate one vector per word. We use each vector to retrieve
the ten closest words using cosine similarity, expanding this
initial list of 8 seed words into 50 climate-related words
(since many of the related words overlap), which we can use
to identify relevant passages in the 10-K reports. The ex-
panded list of words includes terms like: CO2, deforestation,
ecological, greenhouse, pollutant, viability, etc. For a full
list of vocabulary words, see the supplementary materials.
Subsequently, using our climate vocabulary, we propose
calculate a climate relevance score for each section, which
we can use in order to identify the sections that are likely
to directly elaborate on climate-related risks, and rank the
identiﬁed sections in each report by relevance. We propose
that sections that contain one or more of the eight initial
seed words be assigned a higher climate-relatedness score,
whereas those containing words derived from the seed words
rank slightly lower. We can then use this score to compare
the reports of a single company within a given time frame
to verify whether there was an evolution in the climate
disclosures before and after the 2010 ruling, but also of
companies within the same sector, such as energy or real
estate, in order to measure different companies’ degree of
accountability with regards to climate risk.
2.2. Analyzing Climate-Related Discourse
Above and beyond identifying the sections of the 10-K re-
ports that address climate-related risks, we also want to ana-
lyze what types of risks are being divulged by the companies.
While there has been some research on analyzing climate
disclosures, it has mostly involved keyword searches or man-
ual analysis by experts (Gamble et al., 1995; Doran & Quinn,
2008). We propose to use more complex, statistical-based
NLP methods such as named entity recognition, sentiment
analysis, and information extraction.
As a ﬁrst step, we propose to identify the types of entities
that are being addressed in the climate disclosure sections.
These entities can be both names of companies and actors,
for instance British Petroleum, an oil and gas company, or
Bayernoil, the name of one of its plants in Germany, but
they can also be more generic entities like ‘reﬁnery’ and
‘pipeline’. These entities can be extracted using an open-
source toolkit such as NLTK (Loper & Bird, 2002), which
can also be used to identify the types of entities mentioned,differentiating persons, locations, dates, amounts, etc. We
could also enhance NLTK results by using transfer learning
techniques to make it possible to identify ﬁnance-speciﬁc
people and places (Lee et al., 2017) as well as using external
resources such as DBPedia to extend the scope of the entity
extraction (Auer et al., 2007).
Furthermore, in order to glean additional information from
the climate disclosures, we propose using the Open IE al-
gorithm (Banko et al., 2007), which can extract sets of
relational tuples such as the issue of climate change, could,
reduce demand for our products2in an unsupervised man-
ner. However, since the Open IE approach is greedy and
consequently produces a large number of output tuples, we
aim to cross-reference its output with the named entities
identiﬁed previously as well as the climate vocabulary used
during the section ranking process. This will reduce the
number of tuples extracted and allow us to identify the
discourse accompanying speciﬁc terms such as ‘climate
change’ and ‘greenhouse gas’, and to use sentiment analysis
approaches to classify the discourse as positive or negative.
Finally, since the type of vocabulary as well as the mean-
ings of many words used in ﬁnancial discourse differs from
the vocabulary used in traditional sentiment analysis cor-
pora, we propose to use ﬁnancial word lists (Loughran &
McDonald, 2011) to bootstrap existing sentiment analysis
approaches (Wilson et al., 2005).
3. Projected Results
Using the methodology deﬁned above, we aim to give in-
vestors, analysts and policy makers the tools they need to:
1.Find which companies are addressing the threat of
climate change in their annual disclosures;
2.Narrow down the sections in ﬁnancial disclosures that
address climate-related risk;
3.Analyze what is being disclosed regarding various top-
ics (e.g. emissions) or events (e.g. Paris Agreement);
4.Compare what companies from a given sector are dis-
closing or not regarding their climate liabilities;
5.Infer their long-term climate exposure of companies
that have not publicly disclosed climate risk based on
factors such as their industry, sector and geographical
location.
In conclusion, we propose a combination of human interven-
tion and NLP to carry out an in-depth analysis of the breadth
2Taken from BP’s 2017 annual report: https:
//www.bp.com/content/dam/bp-country/de_ch/
PDF/bp-annual-report-and-form-20f-2017.pdfUsing NLP to Analyze Climate Disclosures
and content of climate change in disclosures. This task is
difﬁcult for humans, but nonetheless a fully-automated NLP
pipeline may not achieve the required granularity and pre-
cision. Adding human validation in the loop could make
the results more transparent and the analysis more compre-
hensive. We foresee that ML tools can be closely combined
with human skills to deal with other social issues beyond
climate change.
References
Auer, S., Bizer, C., Kobilarov, G., Lehmann, J., Cyganiak,
R., and Ives, Z. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open
data. In The Semantic Web , pp. 722–735. Springer, 2007.
Banko, M., Cafarella, M. J., Soderland, S., Broadhead, M.,
and Etzioni, O. Open information extraction from the web.
InProceedings of the International Joint Conferences on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 7, pp. 2670–2676, 2007.
Doran, K. L. and Quinn, E. L. Climate change risk disclo-
sure: a sector by sector analysis of SEC 10-k ﬁlings from
1995-2008. NCJ Int’l L. & Com. Reg. , 34:721, 2008.
Gamble, G. O., Hsu, K., Kite, D., and Radtke, R. R. En-
vironmental disclosures in annual reports and 10Ks: An
examination. Accounting Horizons , 9(3):34, 1995.
Hirji, Z. Most U.S. companies ignoring SEC rule to disclose
climate risks. InsideClimate News , 2013.
Lee, J. Y ., Dernoncourt, F., and Szolovits, P. Transfer learn-
ing for named-entity recognition with neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06273 , 2017.
Loper, E. and Bird, S. NLTK: the natural language toolkit.
arXiv preprint cs/0205028 , 2002.
Loughran, T. and McDonald, B. When is a liability not a
liability? textual analysis, dictionaries, and 10-ks. The
Journal of Finance , 66(1):35–65, 2011.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. GloVe: Global
vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the
2014 conference on empirical methods in natural lan-
guage processing (EMNLP) , pp. 1532–1543, 2014.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Commission
guidance regarding disclosure related to climate change.
33-9106; 34-61469; FR-82, 2010.
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., and Hoffmann, P. Recognizing con-
textual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , 2005.Winn, M., Kirchgeorg, M., Grifﬁths, A., Linnenluecke,
M. K., and G ¨unther, E. Impacts from climate change
on organizations: a conceptual foundation. Business
strategy and the environment , 20(3):157–173, 2011.