A Set-Theoretic Approach to Safe Reinforcement Learning in Power Systems
Daniel Tabas1Baosen Zhang1
Abstract
Reducing the carbon footprint of the energy sec-
tor will be a vital part of the ﬁght against climate
change, and doing so will require the widespread
adoption of renewable energy resources. Op-
timally integrating a large number of these re-
sources requires new control techniques that can
both compensate for the variability of renewables
and satisfy hard engineering constraints. Rein-
forcement learning (RL) is a promising approach
to data-driven control, but it is difﬁcult to verify
that the policies derived from data will be safe.
In this paper, we combine RL with set-theoretic
control to propose a computationally efﬁcient ap-
proach to safe RL. We demonstrate the method
on a simpliﬁed power system model and compare
it with other RL techniques.
1. Introduction
Distributed energy resources (DERs) such as wind, solar,
and energy storage systems are emerging as a crucial means
to achieve greenhouse gas emissions reductions (Steinberg
et al., 2017). However, integrating DERs into existing power
infrastructure while maintaining reliability proves to be chal-
lenging (Kroposki et al., 2017). For example, as DERs come
to dominate the energy supply, the uncertainty in wind and
solar generation will narrow the transient stability margins
of electric generators (Kundur et al., 1994). As a result,
the electric grid will be more prone to failures under large
disturbances such as line outages.
The ﬂexibility and speed of electronically-controlled DERs
can be leveraged for control algorithms that achieve higher
efﬁciency in maintaining system stability. However, when
DERs are integrated at large scale, it is challenging to ﬁnd
or implement the optimal strategy. Further, power systems
are a quintessential example of safety-critical infrastructure,
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Univer-
sity of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. Correspondence
to: Daniel Tabas <dtabas@uw.edu >, Baosen Zhang <zhang-
bao@uw.edu >.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at
ICML 2021.in which the violation of operational constraints can lead to
large blackouts with high economic and human cost. Safe
reinforcement learning (safe RL) offers the possibility to
design efﬁcient controllers for safety-critical applications
without the need for detailed power system models (Chen
et al., 2021; Glavic, 2019; Cao et al., 2020; Cui & Zhang,
2021). Safe RL can take several perspectives (Garc ´ıa &
Fern ´andez, 2015), but in this paper, we are concerned with
the ability to guarantee satisfaction of hard state and action
constraints during both exploration and execution of a pol-
icy. Since guaranteeing constraint satisfaction is impossible
without some degree of knowledge about the system (Wachi
& Sui, 2020), we assume that the system model is at least ap-
proximately known. Even with this model, the task at hand
may be too complex for traditional model-based control.
Contributions. We propose a safe and computationally ef-
ﬁcient reinforcement learning paradigm using results from
set-theoretic control. Our method exploits the geometry of
polytopic robust controlled-invariant sets (RCIs), obtained
either from models (Blanchini & Miani, 2015) or directly
from data (Chen et al., 2019). We design a policy neural
network with an output layer that uses iterative linear pro-
jections to guarantee satisfaction of hard state constraints
during exploration and execution. Our method applies to
safety-critical control tasks which require computationally
efﬁcient decision-making on short timescales. We apply the
technique to a transient stability problem in a small power
system model.
Approaches to safe RL that use weaker notions of safety
include restricting actions to those with Lyapunov stability
guarantees (Perkins & Barto, 2002; Berkenkamp et al., 2017;
Cui & Zhang, 2021) or robustness guarantees (Kretchmar
et al., 2001; Donti et al., 2021). However, stability does not
always translate to constraint satisfaction. Other approaches
use optimization-based “safety ﬁlters” to project an action
recommended by a policy network into a set of safe control
actions (Cheng et al., 2019; Wabersich & Zeilinger, 2021).
However, it may not be possible to solve optimization prob-
lems in real time. The work in (Zheng et al., 2020) takes a
geometric approach in order to guarantee safe exploration
without solving an optimization problem, but the resulting
“one-step” safety guarantee can still lead a system into states
from which no action is safe. Our work extends this one-
step safety guarantee to an inﬁnite-horizon guarantee for aA Set-Theoretic Approach to Safe RL in Power Systems
class of systems with bounded uncertainty.
2. Problem Model
Consider the discrete-time, discounted, inﬁnite-horizon,
constrained robust optimal control problem given by
min
x();u()Ed()¥
å
t=1gtJ(xt;ut) (1a)
subject to,8t:xt+1=f(xt;ut;dt) (1b)
xt+12X8dt2D (1c)
ut2U (1d)
where xt2Rn,ut2Rm, and dt2Rdare the system state,
control input, and exogenous disturbance, respectively, at
time t;Jis a cost based on xtandut;g2(0;1)is a discount
factor; and fdescribes the discrete-time evolution of the
system. The sets XRnandURmrepresent constraints
on the state and action, respectively. We assume the distri-
bution of the disturbances is not known, as this is the case
for most power systems with multiple renewable energy
resources. Instead, we assume that dtlies in a bounded set
Dand require that xt+1must land in Xfor any dt2D.
In general, simple constraint sets Xthat may make engi-
neering sense could lead to (1c)becoming infeasible. This
requires the introduction of invariant sets as deﬁned next.
Deﬁnition 1 (Robust controlled-invariant set (Blanchini &
Miani, 2015)) .The set Sis arobust controlled-invariant
set(RCI) for the system with dynamics (1b) and constraint
(1d) if there exists a feedback controller ut=p(xt)such that
ifx02S;then for all t0and all disturbance sequences
dt2D, it holds that xt2S.
IfSX;it is easy to see that ensuring safe operation
amounts to ensuring that if xt2S;then xt+12S. By deﬁni-
tion, each state in the RCI can be associated with a nonempty
set of control actions that guarantee this property. This set
is called the regulation map :
Deﬁnition 2 (Regulation map (Blanchini & Miani, 2015)) .
The regulation map W:Rn!Rmfor a system with dy-
namics (1b), constraints (1c) and(1d), and RCI SXis
a set-valued map from states to control actions deﬁned as
follows.
W(xt) =fut2U:f(xt;ut;dt)2S;8dt2Dg (2)
=fut2U:f(xt;ut;0)2TSg (3)
where TSis the target set, equal to the RCI “eroded” by
the set of possible disturbances.
RCIs are typically described by polytopes, ellipsoids, or
zonotopes, a special class of polytopes (Maidens et al., 2013;Zhang et al., 2020). Our approach is agnostic to the algo-
rithm used to devise the RCI, but we do require that it can
be represented as a polytope.
LetSXbe an RCI for a system with dynamics f, and let
pq:Rn!Rmbe a function parameterized by qthat maps
states to actions. Then a feasible safe control problem is:
min
qEd()¥
å
t=1gtJ(xt;ut) (4a)
subject to: xt+1=f(xt;ut;dt);8t;x02S (4b)
ut=pq(xt)2W(xt);8xt2S;8t: (4c)
where Xin(1)is replaced by S. Once Sis computed from
either a conservative model or from data, the goal is to ﬁnd
the controller pq.
The key question is how to address (4c)in a way that can
be seamlessly integrated with standard RL techniques. To
this end, we pose two questions: First, what is an appropri-
ate function class for pq? Second, how can we constrain
pq(x)to the set W(x)for all x2Sin a manner that is com-
putationally efﬁcient and differentiable? To answer the ﬁrst
question, we choose neural networks with a custom output
layer. The design of this custom layer, which is the answer
to the second question, is the focus of the remainder of this
paper.
3. RCI Policy Network
We propose a policy network architecture that guarantees
safe operation by selecting actions from the regulation map.
In (Zheng et al., 2020), the authors propose a policy net-
work that selects actions by choosing convex combina-
tions of the vertices of the “one-step admissible” action
setfu2U:f(x;u)2Xg. When Xis replaced by S, the
one-step safety guarantee is replaced by an inﬁnite-horizon
safety guarantee, but the geometry of the regulation map
(feasible set of control actions) becomes more complex. Our
contribution is to accommodate sets described by arbitrary
polytopes into the policy network architecture.
3.1. RCI Policy Network Architecture
The design of the policy network relies on several loose
assumptions about the dynamics and constraints of the sys-
tem.
Assumption 1. The dynamics of the system can be de-
scribed by the inclusion f(xt;ut;dt) =Axt+But+Edt;dt2
Dwhere dtis a noise term that can include (bounded) lin-
earization error if the true system is nonlinear (Boyd et al.,
1994).
The case of uncertainty in A;B, and Eis readily handled,
and is not considered here (Blanchini & Miani, 2015).A Set-Theoretic Approach to Safe RL in Power Systems
Assumption 2. The target set TSand action set Uare
polytopes given by T=fx2Rn:FxggandU=fu2
Rm:Hu¯ug.
Under these assumptions, the regulation map W(x)is a poly-
tope described as
W(x) =fu2Rm:F(Ax+Bu)g;u2Ug (5)
=
u2Rm:
FB
H
u
g FAx
¯u
: (6)
As stated earlier, the set W(x)is nonempty for all x2S.
While it is possible to add a projection layer in a neural
network (Agrawal et al., 2019), we seek a faster implemen-
tation. Moreover, methods that project directly onto W(x)
run the risk of over-exploring the boundary of the set.
We generate a safe control action by taking a safe combi-
nation of base control actions, as follows. All x2Scan
be described as a convex combination of the vertices of S.
That same convex combination can be used to generate a
safe control action when the weights are applied to a set
of carefully chosen base control actions. The base control
actions must be safe actions associated with each vertex of
S, as described in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1. Suppose x2S. Letfsigq
i=1be the set of ver-
tices of S, and let Vi2Rmpibe the matrix whose columns
correspond to the pivertices of W(si). Let Yi2Rnpi
be the matrix whose picolumns are identically si. Let
V=
V1 Vq
,Y=
Y1 Yq
, and p=åq
i=1pi:
Deﬁne the afﬁne set a(x) =fa2Rp:Ya=xgand its in-
tersection with the unit simplex DpasA(x) =fa2a(x):
a0;åp
i=1ai=1g. Then the set V(x) =fVa:a2A(x)g
is contained in the regulation map W(x).
Although V(x)is not, in general, equal to the entirety of
W(x), we demonstrate through simulations that the set V(x)
provides an adequate set of control actions. The proof of
Proposition 1 is straightforward and is provided in Appendix
A. Figure 1 displays examples of XandSand illustrates
the relationship between W(xi)andV(xi)for some sample
points xi2S.
3.2. Cyclic projections algorithm
What should be the outputs of a policy parameterized by a
neural network? The policy should output a, an element
ofA(x), which provides a safe combination of base control
actions. This takes a difﬁcult problem (map the outputs of
a neural network’s last hidden layer to the set W(x)) and
reduces it to an easier problem (map the outputs of a neural
network’s last hidden layer to the set A(x)). The set A(x)
has a simple geometry: it is the (nonempty) intersection of
an afﬁne set with the unit simplex. We need a differentiable
and efﬁcient way to ﬁnd a point in this intersection, since
Figure 1. Left: Safe set Xand RCI set Sfor an example system
and the positions of four points inside S.Right: the set of safe
actions W(xi)atxiand the subset V(xi)W(xi)that is used by our
algorithm, as well as the full action set U.
the mapping is attached to the output of a neural network
and must be implemented in real time. Since A(x)is an
intersection of convex sets, we can efﬁciently ﬁnd a point
in the intersection of these sets using cyclic projections
(Bregman, 1967) as described in Algorithm 1.
We initialize from b2Rp;which is the output from the last
hidden layer of pqand which represents a set of weights
that may be infeasible ( Yb6=xorb62Dp). Projection onto
each of the convex sets is computationally efﬁcient and
differentiable. Solving this problem in the output layer of
the policy network allows the network to choose a safe
action u=Va;a2A(x), just by specifying b.
Algorithm 1 Efﬁcient cyclic projections to A(xt)
Require: State x;initial weights b;tolerance e>0
Ensure: a2A(x)
1:a0 softmax (b)fInitialize in Dpg
2:fork=0 :kmaxdo
3: Iteratively project: Dp!a(x)!Rp
+!Dpuntil con-
vergence
4:end for
The cyclic projections algorithm will converge since all sets
are convex (Bregman, 1967). When the initial distance
kP(Ya0 x)k2is small, Algorithm 1 converges in a few ( <
10) iterations. In order to incentivize efﬁciency, this distance
is added as a penalty in the reward function. Simulation
results show that this penalty is effective in encouraging
efﬁciency.
Since each projection step is differentiable and can be per-
formed quickly, Algorithm 1 can be integrated seamlessly
into the output layer of the policy network. During training,
it is possible to back-propagate through Algorithm 1 in order
to tune not just the choice of initial weights bbut also the
choice of ﬁnal weights awith respect to the policy parame-
tersq. Details of this algorithm are provided in Appendix
B.A Set-Theoretic Approach to Safe RL in Power Systems
Figure 2. Illustration of the policy network architecture and its
relationship to the environment.
4. Simulations
4.1. Power System Example
Because of space constraints, we consider a simpliﬁed single
machine-inﬁnite bus power system (Machowski et al., 2008)
where the generator bus includes a synchronous electric
generator, a DER, and a ﬂuctuating net load comprising a
load and/or variable renewable energy supply (Fig. 3). The
rotor angle dynamics of the generator are given by the swing
equations in discrete time, where Dtis the time step:
dt+1=dt+wt+1Dt (7a)
Mwt+1=Mwt (Ksindt+Dwt ut+dt)Dt (7b)
where dis the rotor phase angle measured relative to the
inﬁnite bus, wis the deviation of the generator frequency
from 60 Hz, uis the control input (real power injection from
DER), and dis an exogenous disturbance in the form of
ﬂuctuating net real power demand. The parameters M,D,
andKare the inertia, damping, and synchronizing power
coefﬁcients, respectively. The internal dynamics of the DER
occur on much faster timescales and are not modeled.
The objective of the DER is to modulate its real power
output utto balance transient stability enhancement with
control effort, subject to the constraints of the system. Tran-
sient stability is aided by keeping dandwclose to their
nominal values (taken to be zero without loss of generality).
The state at time tisxt=
dtwtT. The constraint xt2X
is a box constraint which includes an interval constraint
ondtto enforce transient stability margins and an interval
constraint on wtto protect generators and other equipment.
The interval constraints ut2Uanddt2Drepresent the
power capacity limits of the DER and net load variations,
Figure 3. Illustration of the single machine-inﬁnite bus power sys-
tem under consideration.
Figure 4. Training results per episode over 20 training trials
(min/avg/max). Left: Episode reward. Middle: Maximum ab-
solute rotor angle. Right: Average absolute rotor angle.
respectively. The sets XandSfor the system are shown in
the left pane of Figure 1.
4.2. RL Algorithm
To train the policy network, we use the Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm (Lillicrap et al., 2016).
Implementation details are provided in Appendix C. For
comparison, we also train a policy network that does not
have built-in safety guarantees. Instead, the cost function
for training this policy network includes a penalty term for
state constraint violations. The results show that even with
a soft penalty, constraint violations persist throughout both
training and testing. Figure 4 compares the training perfor-
mance of the two networks in terms of rewards, maximum
rotor angle per episode, and average rotor angle per episode.
Figure 5 compares some time-domain test trajectories re-
sulting from the control policies of the RCI and generic
policy networks. We found that the average number of Al-
gorithm 1 iterations decreased from 10 to 7 over the course
of training, demonstrating (increasing) efﬁciency through-
out. All code used to generate these results is available at
github.com/dtabas/safe-rl .
5. Conclusions and future work
Safe RL applied to power system operations has the poten-
tial to contribute to the widespread adoption of low-carbon
energy sources. In this paper, we propose a novel policy
network architecture for computationally efﬁcient safe RL
in power systems. Our approach leverages set-theoretic
techniques to provide an efﬁcient and differentiable meansA Set-Theoretic Approach to Safe RL in Power Systems
Figure 5. Test results. Left: rotor angle trajectories, min/avg/max
over 20 trained networks. Right: Control actions for a single
trained RCI policy network, along with the safe control set W(xt)
and subset V(xt)for each state visited along the trajectory.
of guaranteeing that state trajectories will satisfy hard con-
straints. We demonstrate the proposed method on a simple
power system model, and show that safe operation is main-
tained throughout training. The proposed policy network
architecture outperforms conventional RL methods in terms
of safety. In future work, we will investigate the robustness
of the policies to topology changes. We will also propose
an alternative closed-form safe output layer.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Liyuan Zheng for guidance,
Sarah H.Q. Li for helpful discussions, and the reviewers for
their useful comments. This work is partially supported by
the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fel-
lowship Program under Grant No. DGE-1762114 and NSF
grant ECCS-1930605. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions,
or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
National Science Foundation.
References
Agrawal, A., Amos, B., Barratt, S., Boyd, S., Diamond,
S., and Zico Kolter, J. Differentiable convex optimiza-
tion layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 32(NeurIPS), 2019.
Berkenkamp, F., Turchetta, M., Schoellig, A. P., and Krause,
A. Safe model-based reinforcement learning with sta-
bility guarantees. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , volume 2017-Decem, pp. 909–919,
2017.
Blanchini, F. and Miani, S. Set-theoretic methods in control .
Birkhauser, 2015.
Boyd, S., El Ghaoui, L., Feron, E., and Balakrishnan, V .
Linear Matrix Inequalities in System and Control Theory ,volume 15. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathemat-
ics, Philadelphia, 1994.
Bregman, L. M. The relaxation method of ﬁnding the com-
mon point of convex sets and its application to the solu-
tion of problems in convex programming. USSR Com-
putational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics , 7(3):
200–217, 1967.
Cao, D., Hu, W., Zhao, J., Zhang, G., Zhang, B., Liu, Z.,
Chen, Z., and Blaabjerg, F. Reinforcement Learning and
Its Applications in Modern Power and Energy Systems:
A Review. Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean
Energy , 8(6):1029–1042, 2020.
Chen, X., Qu, G., Tang, Y ., Low, S., and Li, N. Rein-
forcement Learning for Decision-Making and Control
in Power Systems: Tutorial, Review, and Vision. arXiv
preprint: arXiv 2102.01168 , 2021.
Chen, Y ., Peng, H., Grizzle, J., and Ozay, N. Data-Driven
Computation of Minimal Robust Control Invariant Set. In
2018 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control , volume
2018-Decem, pp. 4052–4058. IEEE, 2019.
Cheng, R., Orosz, G., Murray, R. M., and Burdick, J. W.
End-to-end safe reinforcement learning through barrier
functions for safety-critical continuous control tasks. In
33rd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp. 3387–
3395, 2019.
Cui, W. and Zhang, B. Reinforcement Learning for Opti-
mal Frequency Control: A Lyapunov Approach. arXiv
preprint: 2009.05654v3 , 2021.
Donti, P. L., Roderick, M., Fazlyab, M., and Kolter, J. Z.
Enforcing robust control guarantees within neural net-
work policies. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , pp. 1–26, 2021.
Garc ´ıa, J. and Fern ´andez, F. A Comprehensive Survey
on Safe Reinforcement Learning. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 16:1437–1480, 2015.
Glavic, M. (Deep) Reinforcement learning for electric
power system control and related problems: A short re-
view and perspectives. Annual Reviews in Control , 48:
22–35, 2019.
Kretchmar, R. M., Young, P. M., Anderson, C. W., Hittle,
D. C., Anderson, M. L., and Delnero, C. C. Robust
reinforcement learning control with static and dynamic
stability. International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear
Control , 11(15):1469–1500, 2001.
Kroposki, B., Johnson, B., Zhang, Y ., Gevorgian, V ., Den-
holm, P., Hodge, B. M., and Hannegan, B. AchievingA Set-Theoretic Approach to Safe RL in Power Systems
a 100% Renewable Grid: Operating Electric Power Sys-
tems with Extremely High Levels of Variable Renewable
Energy. IEEE Power and Energy Magazine , 15(2):61–73,
2017.
Kundur, P., Balu, N., and Lauby, M. Power system stability
and control . McGraw-Hill, New York, 7 edition, 1994.
Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T.,
Tassa, Y ., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous con-
trol with deep reinforcement learning. 4th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016 -
Conference Track Proceedings , 2016.
Machowski, J., Bialek, J. W., and Bumby, J. R. Power
System Dynamics: Stability and Control . Wiley, 2 edition,
2008.
Maidens, J. N., Kaynama, S., Mitchell, I. M., Oishi, M. M.,
and Dumont, G. A. Lagrangian methods for approxi-
mating the viability kernel in high-dimensional systems.
Automatica , 49(7):2017–2029, 2013.
Perkins, T. J. and Barto, A. G. Lyapunov design for safe rein-
forcement learning control. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 3(4-5):803–832, 2002.
Steinberg, D., Bielen, D., Eichman, J., Eurek, K., Logan,
J., Mai, T., McMillan, C., Parker, A., Vimmerstedt, L.,
and Wilson, E. Electriﬁcation and Decarbonization: Ex-
ploring U.S. Energy Use and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
in Scenarios with Widespread Electriﬁcation and Power
Sector Decarbonization. Technical Report July, National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2017.
Wabersich, K. P. and Zeilinger, M. N. A predictive safety
ﬁlter for learning-based control of constrained nonlinear
dynamical systems. Automatica , 129:109597, 2021.
Wachi, A. and Sui, Y . Safe reinforcement learning in con-
strained markov decision processes. 37th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020 , 2020.
Zhang, Y ., Li, Y ., Tomsovic, K., Djouadi, S., and Yue, M.
Review on Set-Theoretic Methods for Safety Veriﬁca-
tion and Control of Power System. IET Energy Systems
Integration , pp. 2–12, 2020.
Zheng, L., Shi, Y ., Ratliff, L. J., and Zhang, B. Safe rein-
forcement learning of control-afﬁne systems with vertex
networks. arXiv preprint: arXiv 2003.09488v1 , 2020.
Appendix
A. Proof of Proposition 1
First, we restate the deﬁnition of regulation map. The regu-
lation map at a state x2Sis given byW(x) =
u2Rm:
FB
H
u
g FAx
¯u
(8)
where Ais the state transition matrix, Bis the input-to-
state matrix, Fandgdeﬁne the target set TS:T=fx2
Rn:Fxgg, and Hand ¯udeﬁne the control set U:=
fu2Rm:Hu¯ug. As stated earlier, the case of bounded
uncertainty in AandBarising from noise or nonlinearities
in the dynamics is readily handled as an extension and not
considered here (Blanchini & Miani, 2015). The proof of
Proposition 1 is stated next.
Proof. Fixx2Sandu2V(x):=fVa:a2A(x)g;so that
u=åp
i=1aivi, where viis the ithcolumn of V, for some
a2A(x). We will show that u2W(x):Evaluating the left-
hand side of (8) yields

FB
H
u=
FB
Hp
å
i=1aivi (9)
=p
å
i=1ai
FB
H
vi (10)
p
å
i=1ai
g FAs i
¯u
(11)
where (11) follows from the fact that for each i=1;:::; p,
(8)holds with u=viandx=si, since viis a vertex of (and
therefore an element of) W(si);the set of safe actions at si,
a vertex of S. Continuing from (11), we have
p
å
i=1ai
g FAs i
¯u
=
åp
i=1ai(g FAs i)
åp
i=1ai¯u
(12)
=
g FAåp
i=1aisi
¯u
(13)
=
g FAx
¯u
(14)
where (13) follows from the fact that åp
i=1ai=1, and (14)
follows from the fact that for a2A(x),åp
i=1aisi=x. By
the deﬁnition (8), we conclude u2W(x):Since uwas arbi-
trary, we conclude that V(x)W(x)for any x2S.
B. Cyclic projections algorithm
Algorithm 2 describes in more detail the cyclic projections
algorithm that is employed at the output layer of the policy
network. Step 4 is the Euclidean projection onto the afﬁne
seta(xt):For efﬁciency, we divide the projection onto the
simplex into two steps. Step 5 is the Euclidean projection
onto the nonnegative orthant Rp
+;while step 6 is the pro-
jection from Rp
+to the unit simplex Dpwith respect to the
relative entropy function D(x;y) =åp
i=1(yi xi+xilnxi
yi)A Set-Theoretic Approach to Safe RL in Power Systems
Algorithm 2 Efﬁcient cyclic projections to A(xt)
Require: State xt, initial infeasible weights bt;tolerance
e>0
Ensure: at2A(xt)
1:P:=YT(YYT) 1fProjection matrixg
2:a0 softmax (bt)fInitialize in Dpg
3:fork=0 :kmaxdo
4: xk (I PY)ak
t+PxtfProject onto a(xt)g
5: hk max (xk;0)fProject onto Rp
+g
6: ak+1
t hk
khkk1fProject from Rp
+toDp(Bregman,
1967)g
7: ifkak+1
t xkk<ethen
8: Return ak+1
t
9: end if
10:end for
(Bregman, 1967). The reason for this approach is that steps
5 and 6 are each computationally efﬁcient, whereas projec-
tion from all of Rpto the unit simplex is a more difﬁcult
problem. Using the softmax operation in place of steps 5
and 6 displayed worse convergence in simulations, but the
softmax is still used to generate an initial point inside one
of the target sets (the unit simplex).
C. RL algorithm implementation details
The policy network architecture consists of 2 hidden layers
each with 256 nodes, and an output layer generating safe
actions as described in Section 3. We train the policy net-
work for 200 episodes, where each episode consists of 100
time steps (5 second duration). Each episode is initailized
to a random starting point in the interior of the invariant
set, and during each episode, the system is subjected to
persistent, randomly generated disturbances. To generate
the range of results displayed, we perform 20 “trials” train-
ing the network from scratch. Simulations were built upon
an existing DDPG implementation from the GitHub repo
github.com/higgsfield/RL-Adventure-2 , and
the power system model was built upon the OpenAI gym
environment pendulum-v0 .
The reward function is given by J(xt;ut) =xT
tQxt+uT
tRut+
ct;where QandRare diagonal matrices representing costs
on states and actions and ctis a penalty term. For the RCI
network, ctincentivizes the network to produce intial points
a0
tin Algorithm 1 that are close to the target afﬁne set a(xt),
in order to speed up convergence of the cyclic projection
algorithm. This penalty is given by the Euclidean distance
to the afﬁne set, ct=kP(Ya0
t xt)k2;where Pis deﬁned in
Algorithm 2.
We compare the performance of the RCI policy network to
that of a policy network with a soft penalty on constraintviolations in place of the set-based safety guarantee. For this
baseline method, the penalty term is given by ct=0ifxt2X
andct=m(xt)else, where m(xt)is constant or increasing
with respect to the extent of the constraint violation.