Expert-in-the-loop Systems Towards Safety-critical
Machine Learning Technology in Wildﬁre Intelligence
Maria João Sousa, Alexandra Moutinho
IDMEC, Instituto Superior Técnico,
Universidade de Lisboa
maria.joao.sousa@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
alexandra.moutinho@tecnico.ulisboa.ptMiguel Almeida
Forest Fire Research Center,
ADAI, University of Coimbra
miguelalmeida@adai.pt
Abstract
With the advent of climate change, wildﬁres are becoming more frequent and severe
across several regions worldwide. To prevent and mitigate its effects, wildﬁre intel-
ligence plays a pivotal role, e.g.to monitor the evolution of wildﬁres and for early
detection in high-risk areas such as wildland-urban-interface regions. Recent works
have proposed deep learning solutions for ﬁre detection tasks, however the current
limited databases prevent reliable real-world deployments. We propose the devel-
opment of expert-in-the-loop systems that combine the beneﬁts of semi-automated
data annotation with relevant domain knowledge expertise. Through this approach
we aim to improve the data curation process and contribute to the generation of
large-scale image databases for relevant wildﬁre tasks and empower the application
of machine learning techniques in wildﬁre intelligence in real scenarios.
1 Introduction
Wildﬁres are a recurrent natural hazard on a global scale that has a brutal impact on the environment
and natural ecosystems, which can lead to disasters with dire impacts on communities [ 1]. As a result
of climate change, ﬁre events are becoming more frequent and severe, with meteorological conditions
of high ignition propensity being more frequently met, leading to increased ﬁre spotting, and rapid
spread. In addition, these conditions are veriﬁed over longer periods, extending ﬁre seasons in several
regions worldwide.
To prevent and mitigate the devastating effects of wildﬁre events, it becomes urgent to detect ﬁres in
an early stage and to monitor wildﬁres in near-real-time as the events unravel, providing enhanced
situational awareness for decision-making and operational teams. In that sense, wildﬁre intelligence
plays a pivotal role, especially for high-risk areas such as wildland-urban-interface regions [ 2] and
large-scale wildﬁres [ 3]. For these reasons, there is a current demand for improvements and increased
levels of automation in the stages of pre-ﬁre event, ﬁreﬁghting, and aftermath.
In this context, the breakthroughs in machine learning (ML) can be an enabling technology towards
the integration of artiﬁcial intelligence products in current decision support systems. More speciﬁcally,
related works have proposed ML solutions for image-based ﬁre detection tasks [ 4,5], however the
quality and limited size of image databases available often do not offer generalization guarantees
for reliable deployments in real contexts [ 6]. Although transfer learning and data augmentation
techniques have been explored in related work, the limitations in interpretability and transparency of
black-box models prevent effectively ﬁne-tuning these models to solve existing shortcomings [ 6].
The lack of large-scale databases for wildﬁre detection and monitoring tasks is a known hurdle in
developing machine learning algorithms with adequate generalization.
Corresponding author.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.Considering that employing ML solutions for wildﬁre intelligence involves deployments in safety-
critical applications, the robustness and reliability of the models have yet to undergo signiﬁcant
developments. Conversely, this may be achieved through high-quality data curation, despite not alle-
viating black-box limitations, or through the exploration of algorithms with increased explainability,
ﬁne-tuning ability and interpretability. However, both these scenarios call for the input of expert
knowledge to develop accurately annotated data, which is particularly nuanced in the ﬁeld of wildﬁre
management and operations, and requires domain expertise as there is also high data uncertainty.
To address these issues, we propose the development of expert-in-the-loop systems that combine
the automation advantages provided by machine learning with the introduction of relevant domain
knowledge expertise. The main objective of the proposed approach is the development of semi-
automated software tools that can support data curation by wildﬁre experts. This solution can allow a
better handling of data uncertainty and improve the quality of data sources, with the ultimate objective
of enabling the development of large-scale databases for wildﬁre-related problems. More importantly
the expert-in-the-loop approach allows involving domain experts and end-users ( e.g., researchers and
public agencies) in the development procedure, thus improving the relevance of machine learning
applications developed for wildﬁre intelligence in real contexts.
2 Image-based Wildﬁre Management Tasks
Image data for wildﬁre-related tasks can have a broad spectrum of characteristics and modalities
as these can be collected e.g., from satellites, aerial vehicles, watchtowers, or ground teams. The
latency associated with these data types also varies and consequently, so does its timescales of
application. From this plurality arises a great breadth of opportunities for ML approaches to deal
with high-dimensional data, but also a great challenge for data curation. Herein, we outline several
relevant tasks followed by a brief data description.
Tasks Wildﬁre management involves four main stages: i)prevention, ii)preparedness, iii)response
andiv)recovery. The following tasks can extend to several of these stages and involve processing of
large amounts of image data, thus having a high potential interest and beneﬁt from the usage of ML.
Risk assessment concerning environmental conditions and risk mapping based on land use
and social patterns;
Vegetation management to reduce ﬁre severity, e.g.fuel mapping, monitoring of fuel breaks,
or tracking of vegetation fuel moisture content;
Wildﬁre detection and monitoring, e.g., early identiﬁcation of ﬂames and smoke plume,
mapping of the ﬁrefront(s), early detection of spot ﬁres and identiﬁcation of hot spots;
Post-event analyses, e.g., mapping burned areas, evaluation of possible subsequent cascading
effects, e.g., erosion risks, and air quality estimation based on remote sensing.
Data The evolving datasets being developed comprise multimodal image data, currently in the
visible and thermal infrared bands, including images captured from ground teams, watchtowers,
aircraft and high-altitude balloons, which are exempliﬁed in Fig. 1 (for visible range instances only).
The image samples comprise a diverse collection of situations, with most concerning real wildﬁre
events and ﬁeld experimental burns. To create a balanced and robust set of data, factors that may
induce misclassiﬁcations are also included such as clouds, fog or sunsets, as well as ﬁreﬁghting
vehicles, power lines and various types of operational teams.
Figure 1: Samples of ﬁre and not ﬁre instances captured from ground teams, drones and high-altitude balloons,
along with aerial vehicles and teams in operational missions in a wide variety of scenarios and lighting conditions.
23 Proposed Approach
The development of expert-in-the-loop systems aims to bridge the gap between machine learning
automation ( e.g. in classiﬁcation, segmentation, or detection tasks) and the inclusion of relevant
domain knowledge expertise, so that data curation is relevant for wildﬁre intelligence in real-world
scenarios and wildﬁre science research. Previous contributions in the literature have favored tech-
niques that are well-suited for real-time deployments despite having limitations in performance,
in lack of transparency and interpretability. However, those limitations hamper considerably the
reliability and acceptance of end-users of such techniques, hindering the deployment in safety-critical
applications in real contexts.
This novel approach in wildﬁre related applications leverages the potential of exploring machine
learning and computer vision, and intelligent systems methods that have not been particularly designed
for online computational performance (in terms of speed/energy) in real-time deployments, but are
rather accurate despite computationally heavy and/or time-consuming. To harness the advantages
of this approach, this project aims to design expert-in-the-loop systems and develop software tools
that can introduce domain knowledge into the data curation and task design processes. To that
end, this approach can be outlined as exempliﬁed in the diagram in Fig. 2. Domain expertise is
introduced in two stages through two feedback loops: 1) task deﬁnition/reﬁnement - where experts
deﬁne relevant tasks and reﬁne these based on the results of the data curation process (outer loop); and
2) expert validation and interpretation - where at the end of automated processing pipeline, experts
enable re-iteration and learning patterns on veriﬁed outputs (inner loop). Depending on the task at
hand, feature extraction, feature selection, detection and pixel-level segmentation techniques used
for semi-automated annotation can resort to several computer vision, machine learning and a broad
scope of intelligent systems approaches. Successful implementations of this approach should aim for
obtaining increasingly accurate ﬁne-grained outputs validated with cohorts of experts, which shall be
quantiﬁed with relevant evaluation metrics for quantitative benchmarking.
dataselectionpreprocessingimage processing(CV, ML, etc.)analysis toolsinterpretationtarget datapreprocessed dataannotated datalearning patternsdatabases
expert validation
data curationwildfire task definition
defined taskstask refinementexpert assessment
Figure 2: Expert-in-the-loop system comprising a computational data annotation pipeline with expert feedback.
The key beneﬁt of this data curation approach is to yield ﬁne-grained annotated data sources for the
development of large-scale databases for wildﬁre-related problems. By being validated by domain
experts, it will also improve the relevance of subsequent machine learning applications developed
for end-users ( e.g.wildﬁre management, ﬁreﬁghting and civil protection agencies, and researchers
working on wildﬁre-related topics).
4 Conclusion and Future Work
The solutions developed through the proposed approach will be an important stepping stone for
data curation and creating large-scale datasets for wildﬁre detection and monitoring. These datasets
will open opportunities for leveraging ML technologies in this context, as well as pave the way for
relevant multi-view data association [ 7] and autonomous robotics tasks in this domain [ 8]. ML along
with emerging technologies such as unmanned aerial vehicles and cube-sat systems are important
enabling technologies for near-real-time wildﬁre intelligence, which will have an essential role in
decision support systems with crucial impacts in the safety of at risk populations and environment
protection.
3Broader Impact
Real-time early ﬁre detection and monitoring systems can prevent the loss of natural ecosystems
responsible for climate regulation through carbon sequestration, can help to avoid the occurrence
of large burnt areas, and the emission of greenhouse gases. Therefore, the integration, at different
timescales, of data-driven intelligent systems in decision support systems for ﬁreﬁghting and civil pro-
tection can contribute to mitigate the social, cultural, environmental and economic effects associated
with wildﬁres, contributing to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was ﬁnanced by national funds through FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia,
I.P., through IDMEC under project Eye in the Sky (PCIF/SSI/0103/2018), and through IDMEC
under LAETA, project UIDB/50022/2020. M.J. Sousa acknowledges the support from FCT through
the Ph.D. scholarship SFRH/BD/145559/2019.
References
[1]Douglas Paton, Petra T. Buergelt, Sarah McCaffrey, and Fantina Tedim, editors. Wildﬁre Hazards, Risks,
and Disasters . October 2014.
[2]David E Calkin, Jack D Cohen, Mark A Finney, and Matthew P Thompson. How risk management can
prevent future wildﬁre disasters in the wildland-urban interface. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences , 111(2):746–751, 2014.
[3]Fantina Tedim, Vittorio Leone, Malik Amraoui, Christophe Bouillon, Michael R Coughlan, Giuseppe M
Delogu, Paulo M Fernandes, Carmen Ferreira, Sarah McCaffrey, Tara K McGee, et al. Deﬁning extreme
wildﬁre events: difﬁculties, challenges, and impacts. Fire, 1(1):9, 2018.
[4]Piyush Jain, Sean C.P. Coogan, Sriram Ganapathi Subramanian, Mark Crowley, Stephen W. Taylor, and
Mike D. Flannigan. A review of machine learning applications in wildﬁre science and management.
Environmental Reviews , 2020. doi: 10.1139/er-2020-0019.
[5]Anshul Gaur, Abhishek Singh, Anuj Kumar, Ashok Kumar, and Kamal Kapoor. Video ﬂame and smoke
based ﬁre detection algorithms: A literature review. Fire Technology , 2020.
[6]Maria João Sousa, Alexandra Moutinho, and Miguel Almeida. Wildﬁre detection using transfer learning on
augmented datasets. Expert Systems with Applications , 142:112975, 2020.
[7]Deepti Pachauri, Risi Kondor, and Vikas Singh. Solving the multi-way matching problem by permutation
synchronization. In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K. Q. Weinberger, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26 , pages 1860–1868. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013.
[8]J. R. Martínez-de Dios, Luis Merino, Aníbal Ollero, Luis M. Ribeiro, and Xavier Viegas. Multi-UAV
Experiments: Application to Forest Fires , pages 207–228. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2007. ISBN 978-3-540-73958-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-73958-6_8.
4