Neural Representation of the
Stratospheric Ozone Chemistry
Helge Mohn∗
Climate Sciences | Atmospheric Physics
Alfred Wegener Institute
14473 Potsdam, Germany
helge.mohn@awi.deDaniel Kreyling
Climate Sciences | Atmospheric Physics
Alfred Wegener Institute
14473 Potsdam, Germany
Ingo Wohltmann
Climate Sciences | Atmospheric Physics
Alfred Wegener Institute
14473 Potsdam, GermanyRalph Lehmann
Climate Sciences | Atmospheric Physics
Alfred Wegener Institute
14473 Potsdam, Germany
Peter Maass
Center for Industrial Mathematics
University of Bremen
28359 Bremen, GermanyMarkus Rex
Climate Sciences | Atmospheric Physics
Alfred Wegener Institute
14473 Potsdam, Germany
Abstract
In climate modeling, the stratospheric ozone layer is typically only considered in a
highly simplified form due to computational constraints. For climate projections,
it would be of advantage to include the mutual interactions between stratospheric
ozone, temperature, and atmospheric dynamics to accurately represent radiative
forcing. The overarching goal of our research is to replace the ozone chemistry in
climate models with a machine-learned neural representation of the stratospheric
ozone chemistry that allows for a particularly fast, but accurate and stable simula-
tion.
We created a benchmark data set from pairs of input and output variables that
we stored from simulations of a chemistry and transport model. We analyzed
several variants of multilayer perceptrons suitable for physical problems to learn a
neural representation of a function that predicts 24-hour ozone tendencies based
on input variables. We performed a comprehensive hyperparameter optimization
of the multilayer perceptron using Bayesian search and Hyperband early stopping.
We validated our model by implementing it in a chemistry and transport model
and comparing computation time, accuracy, and stability with the full chemistry
module.
We found that our model had a computation time that was a factor of 700 faster
than the full chemistry module. The accuracy of our model compares favorably
to the full chemistry module within a two-year simulation run, also outperforms a
previous polynomial approach for fast ozone chemistry, and reproduces seasonality
well in both hemispheres.
In conclusion, the neural representation of stratospheric ozone chemistry in simula-
tion resulted in an ozone layer that showed a high accuracy, significant speed-up,
and stability in a long-term simulation.
∗Center for Industrial Mathematics, University of Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2022.Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Earth System Modelling Project (ESM) for funding this
work by providing computing time on the ESM partition of the supercomputer JUWELS at the Jülich
Supercomputing Centre (JSC).
Funding Statement
The first author was supported by grants from the Helmholtz School for Marine Data Science
(MarDATA) (HIDSS-0005) and by the Alfred Wegener institute for polar and marine research.
2