Southern Ocean Dynamics Under Climate Change:
New Knowledge Through Physics-Guided
Machine Learning
William Yik
Dept. of Computer Science/Mathematics
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, USA
wyik@hmc.eduMaike Sonnewald
Dept. of Computer Science
University of California
Davis, USA
sonnewald@ucdavis.edu
Mariana C. A. Clare
ECMWF
Bonn, Germany
mariana.clare@ecmwf.intRedouane Lguensat
IPSL, IRD
Paris, France
rlguensat@ipsl.fr
Abstract
Complex ocean systems such as the Antarctic Circumpolar Current play key roles
in the climate, and current models predict shifts in their strength and area under
climate change. However, the physical processes underlying these changes are not
well understood, in part due to the difficulty of characterizing and tracking changes
in ocean physics in complex models. Using the Antarctic Circumpolar Current as a
case study, we extend the method Tracking global Heating with Ocean Regimes
(THOR) to a mesoscale eddy permitting climate model and identify regions of the
ocean characterized by similar physics, called dynamical regimes, using readily
accessible fields from climate models. To this end, we cluster grid cells into
dynamical regimes and train an ensemble of neural networks, allowing uncertainty
quantification, to predict these regimes and track them under climate change.
Finally, we leverage this new knowledge to elucidate the dynamical drivers of the
identified regime shifts as noted by the neural network using the ‘explainability’
methods SHAP and Layer-wise Relevance Propagation. A region undergoing a
profound shift is where the Antarctic Circumpolar Current intersects the Pacific-
Antarctic Ridge, an area important for carbon draw-down and fisheries. In this
region, THOR specifically reveals a shift in dynamical regime under climate change
driven by changes in wind stress and interactions with bathymetry. Using this
knowledge to guide further exploration, we find that as the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current shifts north under intensifying wind stress, the dominant dynamical role of
bathymetry weakens and the flow intensifies.
1 Introduction
Complex ocean systems such as the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) play a central role in the
climate through mechanisms such as heat transport via powerful currents, large-scale overturning,
and carbon exchange with the atmosphere [ 1–3]. Such systems are known to exhibit a wide array
of responses to anthropogenic forcing, but such changes and their underlying physics are poorly
constrained [ 3–5]. This is, in part, a direct consequence of difficulties in both characterizing ocean
physics and tracking its shifts under climate change. Model intercomparison projects, such as
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2023.the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6) [ 6–8], have set up a vital framework for
understanding differences between climate models in both of these areas. A key target for the sixth
and current phase of CMIP was to increase the horizontal resolution, which in the ocean partially
allows for mesoscale turbulence to be expressed. However, modern models have only exacerbated
challenges in characterizing and tracking ocean physics due to their complexity and size. As a result,
key systems such as the ACC as well as their variability among models are often described using bulk
metrics, such as, the overturning strength integrated over global longitude [ 1,9]. Bulk metrics have
limited scope for elucidating the dynamics driving the changes, as these largely vary in space. For
the first time, we apply the method Tracking global Heating with Ocean Regimes (THOR) proposed
by [10] to the ocean of a mesoscale turbulence-permitting model, the Coupled Model 4 [ 11,12],
to both understand and track ocean dynamics under climate change. THOR is a three-step process
beginning with unsupervised classification of ocean grid cells into dynamical regimes based on their
physics. For this step, we use Native Emergent Manifold Interrogation (NEMI) [ 13]. The second
component of THOR trains a deep ensemble of neural networks to predict these dynamical regimes
from the previous step using readily accessible fields as inputs (e.g., sea surface height, depth, wind
stress, and mass transport). Finally, the third step of THOR applies this trained deep ensemble to a
new climate change scenario or entirely new model of interest to understand changes in dynamical
regimes over time. This step also incorporates uncertainty quantification and eXplainable Artificial
Intelligence (XAI) methods to guide further exploration of newly discovered ocean phenomena. Here
we use THOR to investigate changes in the the region where the ACC meets the Pacific-Antarctic
Ridge (PAR). THOR specifically reveals a shift in dynamical regime in this region under climate
change, and XAI methods additionally show that these are related to changes in wind stress and
interactions with the bathymetry. Using this new information provided by THOR, we further explore
the ACC under climate change and find that the shifts in regional dynamical regime is explained by
northward movement of the ACC driven by changes in wind stress. This ACC movement brings it
into a new, less variable bathymetric region where its interactions with the sea floor are less strong,
thus leading to a flow distributed over a larger area and concentrated at the surface. The remainder of
this manuscript is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a more detailed overview of the THOR
method. Section 3 details our exploration of the ACC guided by new knowledge revealed by THOR.
Lastly, Section 4 concludes the paper with potential directions for future work.
2 Tracking global Heating with Ocean Regimes (THOR)
Figure 1: Six Dynamical regimes discovered by
NEMI on the piControl run of MOM6.In this manuscript we apply THOR (Figure 2) to
the Modular Ocean Model version 6 (MOM6)
[14,12,15], a component of the Coupled Model
version 4 (CM4) [ 11]. CM4 operates at an ocean
resolution of 0.25◦which allows for mesoscale
eddies, differentiating itself from the 1◦ECCO
model [ 16] studied by [ 10]. The first step of
THOR addresses the key issue of unlabeled data
in ML applications for climate sciences by lever-
aging unsupervised learning to create a labeled
dataset from high dimensional ocean model data.
Specifically, ocean grid cells are clustered into
groups, called dynamical regimes, based on their
mean balance of the barotropic vorticity (BV)
equation, a characterization of local circulation
of fluid flow, throughout a preindustrial control
(piControl) run, illustrating the state of the ocean before the start of anthropogenically induced climate
change. For more details, see [10, 17].
Previous applications of THOR to the ECCO model [ 10,18] used k-means clustering to reveal
dynamical regimes. However, [ 13] demonstrates that k-means fails to converge for several information
criteria metrics on the higher resolution MOM6 data. As such, for our first step of THOR (Figure 2a)
we substitute k-means for Native Emergent Manifold Interrogation (NEMI), which has been shown
by [13] to successfully cluster MOM6 BV data into a user-defined number of interpretable dynamical
regimes. Here, we choose six labels, or dynamical regimes, following [ 10]. The global regimes found
by NEMI for the piControl run of CM4 are shown in Figure 1. Notice the oceanographic features
2Figure 2: A high-level overview of the THOR workflow for identifying and tracking ocean dynamical
regimes. Figure adapted from [10].
which are reflected in the dynamical regimes such as large, wind stress-driven gyres and the the
mid-Atlantic ridge. Additionally, note that the vast majority of grid cells are clustered into Regimes
0-4. This indicating that these capture the dominant dynamical regimes in the ocean [ 13] and that
Regime 5 represents residual nonlinear regimes, as in [19].
While the first step of THOR is useful for revealing areas of the ocean characterized by similar
physics, it requires that the BV budget be closed for each new ocean model and experiment in order
for NEMI clustering to be done. This is infeasible for a wide array of models and impossible with
the data routinely made available through CMIP. As such, the second step of THOR (Figure 2b)
trains a neural network (NN) to predict the clustered dynamical regimes from above from more
accessible fields from an ocean model. Specifically, the inputs for each grid cell are the sea surface
height above the geoid (ZOS), its x- and y-gradients, the depth relative to sea level (bathymetry),
itsx- and y-gradients, the curl of surface wind stress torque ( ∇ ×τs), the Coriolis parameter ( f),
and the depth-summed zonal and meridional mass transport (umo_2d and vmo_2d). The notable
additions to this dataset (differentiating it from that of [ 10]) are the mass transport fields. These
were added after preliminary testing showed that neural networks were unable to accurately classify
pairs of regimes whose dominant physics were correlated with mass transport. Each of these inputs
was chosen because they directly impact the values of BV equation terms, meaning that there is
some physical relation between the chosen inputs and the dynamical regimes found in the first step
of THOR. Thus, eXplainable artificial intelligence (XAI) methods may be applied to attribute NN
predictions to specific physical inputs, allowing us to gain insight into the drivers of regime shift
as demonstrated in the next section. During initial testing XAI also revealed spurious correlations
between the input fields and output regimes which guided our choice to add the mass transport
variables to the input.
We use the same MLP architecture described in [ 10] to predict the dynamical regimes, and an
ensemble of 50 such MLPs are trained in order to regularize the latent loss space and gauge uncertainty
in regime predictions. Specifically, we use entropy across the ensemble’s predictions for each grid
cell to quantify uncertainty following [ 20]. More detailed results from training can be found in
Section A.1. Importantly, we find that though the NN does not achieve exceptionally high accuracy,
3the average entropy of incorrectly classified grid cells is higher than that of correctly classified grid
cells. This indicates that the NN is making well-calibrated predictions, correctly represents its own
uncertainty, and is not erroneously overconfident in its predictions.
3 Application to the Southern Ocean
Figure 3: NN dynamical regime predictions for the Historical and SSP585 scenarios along with
entropy (uncertainty) for the SS585 predictions. The contours show bathymetry. The inset shows the
area of interest where the ACC meets the PAR, and the dashed white line shows the meridian where
the transects of Figure 4 are taken.
Figure 4: Wind stress curl and lateral (east-west)
mass transport for both the Historical and SSP585
scenarios. The ACC and PAR are outlined in black
and white, respectively. Red and blue indicate east-
ward and westward flow, respectively. Note that
there is an artifact around -1500m due to regrid-
ding.The third and final step of THOR (Figure 2c) ap-
plies the trained NN ensemble from the previous
section to predict dynamical regimes for entirely
new experiments or ocean models. Here, we
apply the ensemble to the Historical (post indus-
trial revolution to 2015) and SSP585 (aggressive
anthropogenic warming post 2015) runs of CM4
in order to track regime shifts in the Southern
Ocean under climate change. We analyze the
1992-2013 window of the Historical scenario
following [ 10] and the 2080-2100 window of
the SSP585 scenario to elucidate the effects of
anthropogenic warming. Figure 3 shows the
deep ensemble’s mean Southern Ocean regime
predictions for the Historical and SSP585 sce-
narios as well as the entropy for the SSP585
predictions as a proxy for the ensemble’s uncer-
tainty in its predictions under climate change.
Acting as a tool to guide new discovery, THOR
reveals a regime change where the ACC meets
the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge (PAR), a divergent
tectonic plate boundary characterized by rough
bathymetry at around 60◦S,166◦W. This region
of interest is shown in the insets of Figure 3. The
notable shift revealed by THOR from Regime
4 (light green) to Regime 0 (dark blue), com-
bined with the high entropy motivates further
investigation.
We use two XAI methods, the NN specific
layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) [ 21]
and model agnostic Shapley Additive exPlana-
tions (SHAP) [ 22], to determine which inputs
4help THOR’s deep ensemble make its predictions where the ACC meets the PAR. The two values
generally agreed on the relevance of the surface wind stress curl and the bathymetry, as well the
sea surface height which is closely related to the wind (see Section A.2). Given that the ACC is
largely driven by westerly winds surrounding Antarctica, the XAI methods may be indicating a shift
in the wind stress and the interactions between the ACC and the bathymetry. Motivated by this, we
investigate lateral (east-west) mass transport at 166◦W, which represents the portion of the ACC
which cuts through the PAR, as shown in the bottom two panels Figure 4. Here, we see a clear shift
in the core of the ACC northward away from the PAR. Specifically, in the Historical scenario the
eastward jets are closely connected to the bathymetric features of the PAR and concentrated south of
diffuse circulation without a jet-like structure (intense red) at 53◦S. In the SSP585 scenario, however,
the area of intense flow around 50◦S strengthens markedly and is associated with a strengthening
of the wind stress. As such, the core of the ACC moves into a region of less dynamic bathymetry,
allowing it to flow more freely and increase in intensity. Aligning with the new knowledge of wind
stress relevance, the local wind stress curl strengthens just north of the PAR as shown in the top panel
of Figure 4. In response, the ACC shifts in the same direction, pulling it away from the bathymetric
influence of the PAR and fundamentally changing its governing physics, as reflected in the regime
shift initially revealed by THOR in Figure 3.
4 Conclusion
We extend the machine learning method THOR to a mesoscale eddy-permitting climate model in
order to gain insight into the drivers underlying changes in ocean physics under climate change.
Importantly, we use THOR not as an oracle, but rather a tool to discover new knowledge about
ocean dynamical regimes and guide further investigation of shifts in the driving forces behind ocean
circulation. Under this framework, THOR reveals that a fundamental shift in Southern Ocean physics
occurs under climate change where the ACC meets the PAR. Using this new knowledge combined
with XAI methods as a guide, we find that the wind stress curl increases in strength north of the PAR,
pulling the ACC with it and effectively moving the ACC from a bathymetrically locked state over
the PAR to one dominated by the wind stress where its flow increases in strength. It is important to
note that while such conclusions may theoretically be reached by analyzing the raw ocean model
data, such analysis is largely infeasible due to the high resolution and dimensionality of the model
output. THOR addresses these key issues and enables us to easily identify areas of interest for further
investigation such as those discussed in Section 3.
There are several possible directions for future work. First, different CMIP models have different
representations of ocean physics, and the high-resolution version of THOR presented in this work
could provide insight into how these differences affect predictions for various ocean systems under
climate change. Such insight is at the heart of lowering model spread and uncertainty of future
projections. Additionally, since NEMI can cluster the MOM6 data into any given number of regimes,
it is possible to train the NNs of THOR to identify more than 6 dynamical regimes discussed in
Section 2. Future work will investigate additional oceanographic insights revealed by THOR when
analyzing a greater number of regimes. Lastly, the NN ensemble applied in this work classifies the
dynamical regimes of grid cells based on local information to that grid cell. Spatially-aware NN
architectures may be applied, but the large continents and difficulties applying XAI methods to more
complex architectures pose exciting future challenges. Regardless of the supervised technique used
to classify dynamical regimes, we maintain that its predictive power should not trade off with its
interpretability and transparency.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
The authors would like to thank Stephen Griffies, Tarun Verma, and Isaac Held for their helpful dis-
cussions and feedback. WY acknowledges funding from the NOAA Ernest F. Hollings Undergraduate
Scholarship. MS funding: Cooperative Institute for Modeling the Earth System, Princeton University,
under Award NA18OAR4320123 from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S.
Department of Commerce.
Data Availability Statement
The data and code are publicly available at https://github.com/yikwill/THOR-MOM6 .
5References
[1]Christopher C Chapman, Mary-Anne Lea, Amelie Meyer, Jean-Baptiste Sallée, and Mark Hindell. Defining
southern ocean fronts and their influence on biological and physical processes in a changing climate. Nature
Climate Change , 10(3):209–219, 2020.
[2]Adele K Morrison and Andrew McC Hogg. On the relationship between southern ocean overturning and
acc transport. Journal of Physical Oceanography , 43(1):140–148, 2013.
[3]Claus W Böning, Astrid Dispert, Martin Visbeck, SR Rintoul, and Franziska U Schwarzkopf. The response
of the antarctic circumpolar current to recent climate change. Nature Geoscience , 1(12):864–869, 2008.
[4]Clothilde E Langlais, Stephen R Rintoul, and Jan D Zika. Sensitivity of antarctic circumpolar current
transport and eddy activity to wind patterns in the southern ocean. Journal of Physical Oceanography , 45
(4):1051–1067, 2015.
[5]Sarah M Larson, Martha W Buckley, and Amy C Clement. Extracting the buoyancy-driven atlantic
meridional overturning circulation. Journal of Climate , 33(11):4697–4714, 2020.
[6]Gerald A Meehl, George J Boer, Curt Covey, Mojib Latif, and Ronald J Stouffer. The coupled model
intercomparison project (cmip). Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society , 81(2):313–318, 2000.
[7]Veronika Eyring, Sandrine Bony, Gerald A Meehl, Catherine A Senior, Bjorn Stevens, Ronald J Stouffer,
and Karl E Taylor. Overview of the coupled model intercomparison project phase 6 (cmip6) experimental
design and organization. Geoscientific Model Development , 9(5):1937–1958, 2016.
[8]Brian C O’Neill, Claudia Tebaldi, Detlef P Van Vuuren, Veronika Eyring, Pierre Friedlingstein, George
Hurtt, Reto Knutti, Elmar Kriegler, Jean-Francois Lamarque, Jason Lowe, et al. The scenario model
intercomparison project (scenariomip) for cmip6. Geoscientific Model Development , 9(9):3461–3482,
2016.
[9]KA Donohue, KL Tracey, DR Watts, María Paz Chidichimo, and TK Chereskin. Mean antarctic circumpolar
current transport measured in drake passage. Geophysical Research Letters , 43(22):11–760, 2016.
[10] Maike Sonnewald and Redouane Lguensat. Revealing the impact of global heating on north atlantic
circulation using transparent machine learning. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 13(8):
e2021MS002496, 2021.
[11] IM Held, H Guo, A Adcroft, JP Dunne, LW Horowitz, J Krasting, E Shevliakova, M Winton, M Zhao,
M Bushuk, et al. Structure and performance of gfdl’s cm4. 0 climate model. Journal of Advances in
Modeling Earth Systems , 11(11):3691–3727, 2019.
[12] Alistair Adcroft, Whit Anderson, V Balaji, Chris Blanton, Mitchell Bushuk, Carolina O Dufour, John P
Dunne, Stephen M Griffies, Robert Hallberg, Matthew J Harrison, et al. The gfdl global ocean and sea
ice model om4. 0: Model description and simulation features. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth
Systems , 11(10):3167–3211, 2019.
[13] Maike Sonnewald. A hierarchical ensemble manifold methodology for new knowledge on spatial data: an
application to ocean physics. Authorea Preprints , 2023.
[14] Stephen M Griffies. Elements of the modular ocean model (mom). GFDL Ocean Group Tech. Rep , 7(620):
47, 2012.
[15] Stephen M Griffies, Alistair Adcroft, and Robert W Hallberg. A primer on the vertical lagrangian-remap
method in ocean models based on finite volume generalized vertical coordinates. Journal of Advances in
Modeling Earth Systems , 12(10):e2019MS001954, 2020.
[16] GAEL Forget, J-M Campin, P Heimbach, CN Hill, RM Ponte, and C Wunsch. Ecco version 4: An
integrated framework for non-linear inverse modeling and global ocean state estimation. Geoscientific
Model Development , 8(10):3071–3104, 2015.
[17] Hemant Khatri, Stephen M Griffies, Benjamin A Storer, Michele Buzzicotti, Hussein Aluie, Maike
Sonnewald, Raphael Dussin, and Andrew Shao. A scale-dependent analysis of the barotropic vorticity
budget in a global ocean simulation. ESS Open Archive , 2023.
[18] Maike Sonnewald, Redouane Lguensat, Aparna Radhakrishnan, Zoubero Sayibou, Venkatramani Balaji,
and Andrew Wittenberg. Revealing the impact of global warming on climate modes using transparent
machine learning and a suite of climate models. In ICML 2021 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change
with Machine Learning , 2021. URL https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/icml2021/13 .
6[19] Maike Sonnewald, Carl Wunsch, and Patrick Heimbach. Unsupervised learning reveals geography of
global ocean dynamical regions. Earth and Space Science , 6(5):784–794, 2019.
[20] Mariana CA Clare, Maike Sonnewald, Redouane Lguensat, Julie Deshayes, and Venkatramani Balaji.
Explainable artificial intelligence for bayesian neural networks: toward trustworthy predictions of ocean
dynamics. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 14(11):e2022MS003162, 2022.
[21] Grégoire Montavon, Alexander Binder, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Wojciech Samek, and Klaus-Robert Müller.
Layer-wise relevance propagation: an overview. Explainable AI: interpreting, explaining and visualizing
deep learning , pages 193–209, 2019.
[22] María Vega García and José L Aznarte. Shapley additive explanations for no2 forecasting. Ecological
Informatics , 56:101039, 2020.
7A Supplemental Material
A.1 Neural Network Training Details
For the second step of THOR, we train an ensemble of 50 MLP NNs each with the same architecture
as [10] but different weight and bias initializations. These NNs are trained to predict dynamical
regimes for individual ocean grid cells from accessible ocean model fields. Specifically, the 10 inputs
are the sea surface height above the geoid (ZOS), its x- andy-gradients, the depth relative to sea level
(bathymetry), its x- and y-gradients, the curl of surface wind stress torque ( ∇ ×τs), the Coriolis
parameter ( f), and the depth-summed zonal and meridional mass transport (umo_2d and vmo_2d).
The input size of the NNs was resized from 8 in [ 10] to 10 to account for our addition of the mass
transport fields. The outputs are the dynamical regime classifications given by NEMI in step 1 of
THOR.
We train THOR’s deep ensemble to predict the dynamical regimes of single grid cells in a preindustial
control (piControl run), which represents the state of the ocean before anthropogenic climate change.
Thus, the inputs for each grid cell are the piControl mean values of the 10 inputs described above.
Similarly, the outputs are one of six dynamical regimes found by NEMI’s clustering, which was based
on the mean balance of the BV equation during the piControl run. We split the training, validation,
and test data by regions of the ocean to avoid autocorrelation in the data. Specifically, we designate
the Atlantic ocean as test data, the eastern basin of the Pacific ocean as validation, and the remainder
of the ocean as training. This is illustrated in Figure 5.
Each NN ensemble member was trained for 100 epochs to minimize categorical cross-entropy loss
using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1×10−4and batch size of 32. To prevent overfitting,
we enforce early stopping with a patience of 5 epochs. The final validation accuracy of ensemble
members ranged from 65-70%, and the majority early stopped before 25 epochs. Figure 6 shows a
visual summary of the training results. Notice that the entropy is higher in regions where THOR’s
deep ensemble makes more incorrect predictions, particularly in the Weddell Sea and south of
Greenland. Separating grid cell entropy by correct and incorrect predictions reveals that, indeed, the
average entropy for incorrect predictions is greater than that of correct predictions. This indicates
that the ensemble is making well-calibrated measurements of uncertainty and that it is not overstating
its own confidence in its predictions.
A.2 XAI for the Southern Ocean
We apply two XAI methods to understand the relevance of each input field in the ensemble’s
predictions. The first is layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP), which is specific to neural network
models and uses the magnitudes of internal weights as a proxy for relevance. These relevance values
are backpropogated through the network to determine the importance of each input. The relevance for
each input is a value between -1 and 1, inclusive. Positive values indicate that the input was actively
helpful for the NN in making its prediction, negative values indicate that the input was actively
unhelpful, and 0 represents neutral relevance. See [ 21] for more details. We apply LRP to each of the
50 NNs of THOR’s ensemble. The LRP values whose sign is consistent between the 25th and 75th
percentiles of the NN ensemble in the Southern Ocean for the SSP585 (aggressive anthropogenic
warming) scenario are shown in Figures 8 and 9. See [ 20] for more information on applying LRP to
ensembles of NNs.
The second XAI method we apply is Shapley Additative exPlanations (SHAP), which is a model
agnostic method for determining the relevance of each input. SHAP is a type of occlusion analysis
which determines the output effect of removing/adding features from the input. For a given input
and predicted output, a positive SHAP value indicates that the input increases the probability of the
model predicting the output. Similarly, a negative SHAP value indicates that the input decreases the
probability, and 0 indicates no change. As with LRP, we apply SHAP to each of the 50 NNs in the
ensemble. The SHAP values whose sign is consistent between the 25th and 75th percentiles of the
NN ensemble in the Southern Ocean for the SSP585 scenario are shown in Figures 10 and 11. See
[20] for more information on applying SHAP to ensembles of NNs.
8Figure 5: The training, validation, and test areas used for THOR’s deep ensemble.
Figure 6: The NN ensemble’s mean dynamical regime predictions for the test region and the true
regimes. The true-false mask shows where the ensemble’s mean prediction was the correct regime
and where it was not. Finally, the entropy quantifies the regime’s uncertainty in its predictions over
the test region.
9Figure 7: Entropy distributions for the correctly classified grid cells (left) and incorrectly classified
grid cells (right).
10Figure 8: SSP585 scenario LRP values in the Southern Ocean for five of the NN inputs: wind stress
curl, bathymetry, sea surface height, Coriolis parameter, and x-gradient of bathymetry. The first row
shows the areas where THOR’s NN ensemble predicted each regime, and each subsequent row shows
the relevance of an input for predicting each regime.
11Figure 9: SSP585 scenario LRP values in the Southern Ocean for five of the NN inputs: y-gradient of
bathymetry, x- and y-gradients of sea surface height, and depth-summed lateral and meridional mass
transport. The first row shows the areas where THOR’s NN ensemble predicted each regime, and
each subsequent row shows the relevance of an input for predicting each regime.
12Figure 10: SSP585 scenario SHAP values in the Southern Ocean for five of the NN inputs: wind
stress curl, bathymetry, sea surface height, Coriolis parameter, and x-gradient of bathymetry. The
first row shows the areas where THOR’s NN ensemble predicted each regime, and each subsequent
row shows the relevance of an input for predicting each regime.
13Figure 11: SSP585 scenario SHAP values in the Southern Ocean for five of the NN inputs: y-gradient
of bathymetry, x- and y-gradients of sea surface height, and depth-summed lateral and meridional
mass transport. The first row shows the areas where THOR’s NN ensemble predicted each regime,
and each subsequent row shows the relevance of an input for predicting each regime.
14