NightVision: Generating Nighttime Satellite Imagery
from Infra-Red Observations
Paula Harder
Fraunhofer Center Machine Learning
Scientiﬁc Computing, University of Kaiserlautern
paula.harder@itwm.fraunhofer.de
Will Jones
Dpt. of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics
University of Oxford
william.jones@physics.ox.ac.uk
Redouane Lguensat
LSCE-IPSL, CEA Saclay
LOCEAN-IPSL, Sorbonne Université
redouane.lguensat@locean.ipsl.frShahine Bouabid
Dpt. of Statistics
University of Oxford
shahine.bouabid@stats.ox.ac.uk
James Fulton
School of Geosciences
University of Edinburgh
james.fulton@ed.ac.ukDánnell Quesada-Chacón
Institute of Hydrology and Meteorology
Dresden University of Technology
dannell.quesada@tu-dresden.de
Aris Marcolongo
Mathematical Institute
University of Bern
Climate and Environmental Physics
University of Bern
aris.marcolongo@math.unibe.chSoﬁja Stefanovi ´c
Dpt. of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics
University of Oxford
sofija.stefanovic@physics.ox.ac.uk
Yuhan Rao
Institute for Climate Studies
North Carolina State University
yrao5@ncsu.eduPeter Manshausen
Dpt. of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics
University of Oxford
peter.manshausen@physics.ox.ac.uk
Duncan Watson-Parris
Dpt. of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics
University of Oxford
duncan.watson-parris@physics.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
The recent explosion in applications of machine learning to satellite imagery
often rely on visible images and therefore suffer from a lack of data during the
night. The gap can be ﬁlled by employing available infra-red observations to
generate visible images. This work presents how deep learning can be applied
successfully to create those images by using U-Net based architectures. The
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.proposed methods show promising results, achieving a structural similarity index
(SSIM) up to 86% on an independent test set and providing visually convincing
output images, generated from infra-red observations. The code is available at:
https://github.com/paulaharder/hackathon-ci-2020
1 Introduction
The availability of huge amounts of open, high-quality satellite imagery from e.g. Sentinel-2 and
GOES-16 has enabled many machine learning (ML) applications as diverse as the detection of
Penguins [Fretwell and Trathan, 2020], solar-panels [Hou et al., 2019] and ship-tracks [Watson-Parris
et al., 2019]. Many of these applications rely on visible imagery because of the prevalence of
pre-existing models and easier processing and validation. This visible imagery relies on the detection
of reﬂected sunlight during the day, whereas instruments such as the Advanced Baseline Imager
(ABI) on-board GOES-16 are also able to measure infra-red emission throughout the day and night.
These different spectra contain different, but often complementary information, and in principle ML
models could be trained to use either or both depending on their availability. In practice, having
access to homogenised imagery allows a single ML model to be trained to, for example, detect and
track clouds 24 hours a day. This capability would transform our ability to detect the subtle, but
important, perturbations humans are exerting on the climate system [Stevens and Feingold, 2009].
Here we present the result of a three-day hackathon which challenged contestants to generate visible
(RGB) images using only the infra-red imagery available at night. We describe the challenge and
introduce the publicly available training datasets in Section 2, present the three winning models and
their notable features in Section 3, and discuss avenues of future work in Section 4.
We are not aware of any work on generating visible satellite imagery from infra-red observation. In
[Berg et al., 2018] thermal infra-red observations are used to generate visible spectrum images for
trafﬁc scene datasets, also by employing convolutional neural networks.
2 Data Preparation
Data is acquired by the ABI aboard the Geostationary Operational Environment Satellite (GOES)-16
[Schmit et al., 2008]. This is a modern Earth Observation (EO) platform placed in a geostationary
orbit, allowing it to provide visible and IR imagery every ten minutes. Channels 8-16 of infra-red
(IR) channels from the GOES-16 ABI instrument are used to create the inputs of our algorithm,
while channels 1-6, which detect reﬂected solar radiation, are used to create the visible target outputs.
Additional information about the channels used by ABI, and what physical properties they measure,
can be found here1.
For ease of processing we transform these raw channel radiances into RGB composite images using
SatPy software [Raspaud et al., 2020] for both the IR channels (model input) and visible (target outut).
The considered region is -85 to -70 degrees longitude and -15 to -30 degrees latitude, and to reduce
the size of the data we downsample the images to a size of 127127pixels.
For the competition, 2 years of data are provided as training dataset from January 1st2018 to
December 15th2019, the two last weeks of December are thrown out to avoid data leakage between
train and test datasets. The competing methods were tuned ﬁrst in a validation phase where data from
the ﬁrst 15 days of January 2020 were used to calculate the metrics. In the test phase, the participants
used their best performing method once on a test dataset consisting of the last 15 days of January
2020, those results are the ones reported in this paper and served for the ﬁnal ranking.
Interested readers have the possibility of participating in a public version of the challenge on the
Codalab platform2. Data related to the challenge is available from Zenodo repositories (Lguensat and
Watson-Parris [2020]).
1https://www.goes-r.gov/mission/ABI-bands-quick-info.html
2https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/26644
23 Generating Nighttime Imagery with Deep Learning
3.1 Methodology
To tackle the problem of generating visible light images during the night, we employ three different
approaches, supervised Conditional GANs (cGANs), a U-Net and a U-Net ++. All the methods are
U-Net based and share the use of the structural similarity index methods (SSIM) [Wang et al., 2004]
in their (generator) loss function:
SSIM (x;y) =(2xy+c1)(2xy+c2)
(2x+2y+c1)(2x+2y+c2);
wherex;yare two images, x;ytheir mean values, x;ytheir variances, xytheir covariance, all
calculated over all pixels and channels. The variables c1;c2are added to stabilize the division with
weak denominator3. As the models were developed independently from each other during a coding
competition, they also show different data preprocessing and different experimental setups.
3.1.1 Data Preprocessing
Black Images/Pixels The underlying data set contains about 8,000 pairs of infra-red images and
visible light images, both from the night and the day. For the training only daylight images are of
use, therefore we sort out nighttime images. Images from around sunset/sunrise, which contain many
black pixels, are treated differently by the three approaches. The data preprocessing for the cGANs
method leaves most of the sunrise/sunset pictures in the training set, by only sorting out those with
more than 99% black pixels, whereas the U-Net approach only includes images in the training set
with a percentage of non-zero entries across the three RGB channels higher than 80%. For the U-Net
++ based method we use a more complex approach. We ﬁlter the initial set of images to remove
those where more than 0.2% of pixels are ‘dark’ in the visible image channels. We label a pixel
as ‘dark’ if the sum of pixel values across the 3 visible channels is less than 5 (out of a maximum
of 765). The remaining dark pixels in the ﬁltered data are assigned a NaN value which is used to
mask them when calculating SSIM. From our observations these dark pixels mainly occur in parts of
the image around sunrise and sunset, where the sun is not shining on a corner of the image. Only
a very small proportion of dark pixels comes from images which are fully in daylight. We initially
had a much more lenient ﬁlter for dark images based on minimum average pixel value. However this
permitted training images from around sunrise or sunset where a signiﬁcant portion of the image was
in darkness. This caused the trained network to predict dark patches as well, which is counter to our
objective.
3.1.2 Models
Baseline Model As a baseline model we use the k-nearest neighbour (kNN) regression, with k= 3.
The kNN regression means for every infra-red image in the test set we look at the three closest
infra-red images in the training set and then predict the mean of their visible counter parts.
U-Net/U-Net ++ Based on the fully convolutional network [Shelhamer et al., 2017] the U-Net
[Ronneberger et al., 2015] was developed for biological image segmentation. The network consists
of similar downsampling and upsampling parts, which yields a u-shape architecture. The U-Net
skip connections also allow the spatial structure of the input thermal image to shuttle across the
net. The U-Net++ [Zhou et al., 2018] model is a recent and more powerful iteration on the U-Net
architecture with enhanced skip connections. Similar to the U-Net, this model allows the ﬁnal layer
of the network to utilise ﬁne grain detail from shallow paths through the network, and coarse grain
context from the downsampled then upsampled paths. This architecture has been highly successful
for image segmentation, but has been used little for image-to-image regression as in this task. We
implement the U-Net++ both with and without deep supervision [Lee et al., 2015]. We ﬁnd that the
model with deep supervision takes longer to converge and makes less accurate predictions on the test
set, particularly on images with large spatially homogeneous cloud ﬁelds.
3herec1= (0:01 L)2,c2= (0:03 L)2,Lis the dynamic range of the pixel values
3Loss Functions Both U-Net approaches uses a SSIM based loss function. For the U-Net ++ we
implement a slightly modiﬁed version of SSIM so that dark pixels from the target image are ignored
when the spatial average of SSIM is taken. As we use a window size of 11, this means that a single
dark pixel in the target image masks an area within a 5 pixel radius of itself. No masking is applied if
the predicted pixel is dark.
Supervised cGANs cGANs are a class of generative models where a generator Glearns a mapping
from a random noise zand a conditioning input x, to an output y=G(zjx). The generator grows by
attempting to fool a discriminator Dwho learns itself to estimate the likelihood D(yjx)of sample
ybeing either real or generated by G. We propose to frame the nighttime visible imaging from
thermal infra-red observation in the cGANs rationale. Namely, given an infra-red sample xwe
train a generator to estimate its corresponding optical image as ^y=G(zjx). The discriminator
enables the generator to capture and reproduce important realistic features. We augment the objective
with a supervised loss to foster generation of images close to the ground truth. Our preference
goes for anL1penalty to capture low-frequency components while inducing less blurring than the
L2norm. In addition, we also use a structural similarity index based (SSIM) [Wang et al., 2004]
supervision to encourage perceptual persistence of pixels, captured by high-frequency components.
The additional discriminator enables the model to ﬁnd important features to measure similarity other
than the closeness in a L1and SSIM sense. Eventually, the infrared-to-optical image translation
problem writes as the two-player game
min
Gmax
DLcGAN(G;D ) +LL1(G) +LSSIM(G) (1)
whereLcGAN(G;D ) =E[logD(yjx)] +E[log (1 D(G(zjx)jx))],LL1=E[kG(zjx) yk1]and
LSSIM(G) =E[1 SSIM(G(zjx);y)]. Expectations are taken over all couples of infra-red and
optical images (x;y).
Inspired by the success of pix2pix [Isola et al., 2017] based approaches in remote sensing, we use
a U-Net architecture for the generator and a PatchGAN discriminator [Isola et al., 2017]. Instead
of feeding the generator with random noise, we provide stochasticity with dropout layers in the
decoder. Unlike usual discriminators, PatchGAN classiﬁes jointly local regions of the image, fostering
generation of high-frequency components on top of the SSIM supervision.
3.1.3 Experimental Setups
The network in the pure U-Net approach consists of 6 levels of depth, in the other methods we use
U-Nets with 5 levels each. All methods use an Adam optimizer [Kingma and Ba, 2015]. For the
cGAN model, to make up for the additional guidance provided to the generator by the supervision
objectives, we backpropagate on the discriminator twice as much. Using = 0.01,= 10, it is trained
with an initial learning rate 2e-4, decay 0.99, for 500 epochs. We train the U-Net with constant rate
1e-3 and early stopping for 54 epochs. The U-Net++ model is trained at a rate of 2e-1 for (60, 30, 30,
20, 20) epochs using batch sizes of (10, 32, 64, 128, 256) respectively so that gradient updates in
later epochs are subject to less noise.
3.2 Results
The three proposed models are tested on an independent set of 200 test images from daylight (since
ground truth is available), showing the same scenery as the training images. In Table 1 we report the
SSIM and the root mean squared error (RSME). All method show a huge improvement compared to
the baseline method. The cGAN approach reaches a 0.77 mean SSIM, whereas the U-Net method
is about 10% higher. The U-Net++ has slightly better scores, both mean SSIM and RSME, than its
simpler version.
As the human eye is probably the best measure for the quality of the generated images we look
at an example. The ﬁrst row of Figure 1 shows a randomly picked test image during the day. All
methods are able to correctly color clouds, sea and land, subtle details from the clouds are reproduced.
The image we generated with the U-Net++ model is hardly distinguishable from the ground truth.
With our cGAN model we also manage to capture the shapes and details, but the colors are slightly
bleached out. As the actual goal is to predict images from infra-red observations during the night,
row two of Figure 1 shows the results of the models applied on a midnight image. The shapes of the
clouds are reproduced nicely by each model. The U-Net/U-Net++ generated images show black areas
4Table 1: Metrics for the different methods
Method SSIM RSME
Baseline: kNN 0.15 0.24
Method 1: cGAN 0.77 0.11
Method 2: U-Net 0.85 0.09
Method 3: U-Net++ 0.86 0.07
Figure 1: An example from the application of the three methods on unseen images during training,
two case are shown for January 29th2020: at midnight and at noon.
on the edges and color some parts of the ocean darkly, in the U-Net++ approach this is more strongly
pronounced. The images generated by the cGAN method shows good coloring, but some artifacts
from the GAN patches show up and we can see horizontal and vertical lines.
4 Conclusion
In this work we showed that different U-Net based models are capable of producing a visible spectrum
image from IR observations. Especially the non-GAN approaches show very high quality synthetic
images for the daytime observations, on the other hand for the ﬁnal goal, generating from nighttime
observations, the GAN approach images show some desired properties better than the other two
methods. This paper presented ﬁrst experiments, showing promising results. Further work needs to
be done to deal with black spots in nighttime predictions and provide a consistent experimental setup
to explore the proposed methods in detail and have more comparable results. Future research should
aim to generalize model performance better from day to night, taking the subtle differences of IR
observations between night and day into account.
4.1 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the organizers of the Climate Informatics Conference, especially the
Hackathon chair as well as all participants. We are grateful for the reviewers helpful comments.
DWP receives funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
iMIRACLI under Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 860100 and also gratefully acknowl-
edges funding from the NERC ACRUISE project NE/S005390/1. AM acknowledges funding from
the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant number 189908).
5References
A. Berg, J. Ahlberg, and M. Felsberg. Generating visible spectrum images from thermal infrared.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops ,
pages 1143–1152, 2018.
P. T. Fretwell and P. N. Trathan. Discovery of new colonies by sentinel2 reveals good and bad
news for emperor penguins. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation , n/a(n/a), 2020. doi:
10.1002/rse2.176. URL https://zslpublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/rse2.176 .
X. Hou, B. Wang, W. Hu, L. Yin, and H. Wu. Solarnet: A deep learning framework to map solar
power plants in china from satellite imagery, 2019.
P. Isola, J.-Y . Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial
networks. CVPR , 2017.
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 , 2015.
C.-Y . Lee, S. Xie, P. Gallagher, Z. Zhang, and Z. Tu. Deeply-supervised nets. In Artiﬁcial intelligence
and statistics , pages 562–570, 2015.
R. Lguensat and D. Watson-Parris. The Climate Informatics Hackathon 2020: Datasets, Oct. 2020.
URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4061336 .
M. Raspaud, D. Hoese, P. Lahtinen, S. Finkensieper, A. Dybbroe, G. Holl, S. Proud, S. Joro, X. Zhang,
A. Meraner, W. Roberts, L. Ørum Rasmussen, J. H. B. Méndez, joleenf, Y . Zhu, R. Daruwala,
T. Jasmin, BENR0, T. Barnie, E. Sigurðsson, R.K.Garcia, T. Leppelt, ColinDuff, U. Egede,
LTMeyer, M. Itkin, R. Goodson, S. Radar, N. Division, jkotro, and peters77. pytroll/satpy: Version
0.23.0 (2020/09/18), Sept. 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4036291 .
O. Ronneberger, P.Fischer, and T. Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) , 2015.
T. J. Schmit, J. Li, J. Li, W. F. Feltz, J. J. Gurka, M. D. Goldberg, and K. J. Schrab. The GOES-R
Advanced Baseline Imager and the Continuation of Current Sounder Products. J. Appl. Meteor.
Climatol. , 47(10):2696–2711, Oct. 2008. ISSN 1558-8424. doi: 10.1175/2008JAMC1858.1. URL
https://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/full/10.1175/2008JAMC1858.1 .
E. Shelhamer, J. Long, and T. Darrell. Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 39(4):640–651, 2017.
B. Stevens and G. Feingold. Untangling aerosol effects on clouds and precipitation in a buffered
system. Nature , 461(7264):607–613, Oct 2009. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature08281. URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08281 .
Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: From error
visibility to structural similarity. Trans. Img. Proc. , 2004.
D. Watson-Parris, S. Sutherland, M. Christensen, A. Caterini, D. Sejdinovic, and P. Stier. Detect-
ing anthropogenic cloud pertubations with deep learning. Proceedings of the 36th Internatinal
Conference on Machine Learning , 2019.
Z. Zhou, M. M. R. Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang. Unet++: A nested u-net architecture
for medical image segmentation. In Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multimodal
Learning for Clinical Decision Support , pages 3–11. Springer, 2018.
6