Predicting Arctic Methane Seeps via Satellite Imagery
Olya Irzak
Frost Methane LabsAmber Thomas
Stanford University
Stephanie Schneider
Stanford UniversityCatalin Voss
Stanford University
1 Introduction
The arctic has seen signiﬁcant warming and releases of greenhouse gases in the past few decades.
Methane is 28 times more potent as a greenhouse gas than CO 2; it is seeping from the permafrost
region through diffuse bio-decomposition of previously frozen material, and leaking from concen-
trated geological deposits. Arctic geological methane deposits are estimated to include 240 times
the methane currently in the atmosphere [1]. To date, researchers have been unable to quantify the
aggregate leakage rate from these deposits into the atmosphere and predict how it might change
with increasing temperatures. We aim to apply machine learning methods to study the extent of
this climate hazard and inform the deployment of mitigation strategies. By combining a computer
vision-assisted analysis of satellite data with targeted ﬁeld measurements, we seek to (1) determine
the number of concentrated methane seeps, (2) estimate their ﬂow rates, and (3) understand how they
change with increasing temperatures.
Identifying methane seeps via direct imaging of the CH 4absorption spectra is challenging. However,
visual, thermal and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) proxy signals demarcate several reported
categories of concentrated methane release sources, such arctic lakes, seabed clathrate releases, and
methane hills. Faster permafrost thaw beneath arctic lakes causes anomalous freezing patterns that
can be seen from satellites, creating a signal that is readily detected with computer vision techniques
[2].
2 Remote Methane Detection
Methane is an odourless, colorless gas that has a narrow absorption spectra in in the mid-infrared
range, making it non-trivial to detect with standard remote sensing instruments. A small amount of
ground truth data from these methane releases has been collected in ﬁeld by geologists. In addition,
NASA’s ABOVE initiative collects data from methane sensors mounted on an airplane in sub regions
of Alaska. While it is possible to use modiﬁed airplane ﬂyovers to map larger areas, the permafrost
represents 9% of Earth’s surface, and seeps are unevenly distributed within that region, making a
localized-sensing approach or manual ﬁeld measurements prohibitive from both a cost and emissions
perspective. There are two satellites in orbit equipped with the specialized instruments to detect
methane directly: Sentinel-5P has instrumentation with great sensitivity, but with a resolution on the
order of several kilometers; GHGSat’s Claire conversely has a 50-meter resolution but its sensitivity
is above the threshold typical for ﬂow rates in the permafrost. The seeps of interest are therefore
undetectable by existing space-based remote sensing solutions.
Without the ability to directly detect these permafrost methane seeps locally or remotely, we focus on
indirect detection methods. Speciﬁcally, we seek to identify methane released underneath arctic lakes,
where sufﬁcient ﬂow rates lead to abnormal freezing patterns in the winter. This phenomenon yields
a distinct visual, thermal and SAR signature. The broader spectrum of this indirect signal allows
detection via imaging from existing low-earth orbit satellite swarms.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.3 Methods
Due to the limited number of known locations of methane-seeping lakes, we propose a semi-
supervised anomaly detection approach. We propose to:
1. Acquire satellite data with that meet the necessary resolution and quality requirements:
(a) Spatial resolution: anomalous features may be only a few meters across in the winter
(b)Temporal resolution: to detect seeps, we need a small number of clear summer and
winter images. To determine ﬂow rates, we need to capture a high frequency of images
during freeze and thaw season.
(c)Quality control: regions of interest must be relatively cloud free with minimal shadows
and artifacts.
2.Identify bodies of water using classical remote sensing techniques, such as NDWI threshold,
pixel-wise cross entropy and random forests, and appropriate ﬁltering. Sentinel-2 data is
suitable for this task due to its relatively high spatial resolution (most bands of interest
are 10m), a reasonable temporal resolution (constellation revisit time is 5 days), and a
robust QA-band for cloud masking. In our experiments, simple techniques performed well
in summer months, but occasionally misclassiﬁed ice as water. Combining NDWI and a
pixel-wise max entropy classiﬁer improved performance, although we still noticed noise in
the classiﬁcation process, suggesting that additional human veriﬁcation may be required.
3.Separate saline bodies, lakes, glaciers and rivers, as those all have different freezing patterns.
For the Alaska region, we have found the vector lake dataset [3] to be suitable for imaging
data from 2018-19. The dataset includes 294,273 manually veriﬁed lake contours that
have been identiﬁed from digital elevation mapping, normalization for shadows via through
various sensors, and cleaning using edge detection. This dataset could be use to train a
classiﬁer which minimizes manual intervention for the rest of the arctic region.
4. Compile a time-series of freezing-state cloudless images from the arctic fall and spring for
target lakes from Planet Labs RGB & NIR satellite imagery.
5.Find “unusual freezing in lakes” using a clustering approach. Due to a lack of true positives,
we must rely on proxy features to cluster lakes in a given latitude band and identify outliers
for manual review. We consider an intermediate feature representation of a convolutional
neural network trained to predict arctic lake degradation to produce time-series embeddings
for each lake, and employ hierarchical clustering followed by manual re-clustering.
6.Estimate ﬂow rates through features such as sizes and changes in the unfrozen region of the
lake over time, lake depth, temperatures, precipitation, etc.
7.Separate concentrated methane releases from other similar freeze disturbers such as hot
springs through thermal imaging.
8.Finally, track the methane from these releases over years and correlate with arctic tempera-
tures.
Delineating freezing patterns and cloud obfuscation (steps 3-5 above) can be augmented with SAR
C-band datasets, which show promise in estimating diffuse methane emissions[5] and ﬂoating ice
regimes [4] in arctic lakes.
4 Conclusion
Machine learning and computer vision are useful tools in quantifying concentrated methane emissions
from arctic lakes. Although our work focuses on lakes, the proposed approach can be generalized to
other concentrated methane releases, such as river methane seeps, releases from arctic seabed [6] and
Pingos (large hills) that have ﬁlled with methane reported in the Yamal and Gadal peninsulas. It is
important to know whether these phenomena are fairly isolated geologies or widespread effects with
signiﬁcant contribution to the global methane cycle and develop cost-effective mitigation methods
such as converting methane into CO 2to produce energy and reduce 96% of its harmful potential. Since
the region of interest is 9% of the earth’s surface, sparsely populated, with difﬁcult transportation
options, and with unevenly spread geologies of interest, sophisticated satellite data analysis could be
a valuable tool in understanding the changing arctic.
2References
[1] Anthony, K. M. W., Anthony, P., Grosse, G., & Chanton, J. (2012). Geologic methane seeps along boundaries
of Arctic permafrost thaw and melting glaciers. Nature Geoscience, 5(6), 419.
[2] Anthony, K. W., von Deimling, T. S., Nitze, I., Frolking, S., Emond, A., Daanen, R., ... & Grosse, G.
(2018). 21st-century modeled permafrost carbon emissions accelerated by abrupt thaw beneath lakes. Nature
communications, 9(1), 3262.
[3] Wang, J., Sheng, Y ., Hinkel, K. M., & Lyons, E. A. (2012). Drained thaw lake basin recovery on the western
Arctic Coastal Plain of Alaska using high-resolution digital elevation models and remote sensing imagery.
Remote Sensing of Environment, 119, 325-336.
[4] Engram, M., Arp, C. D., Jones, B. M., Ajadi, O. A., & Meyer, F. J. (2018). Analyzing ﬂoating and bedfast lake
ice regimes across Arctic Alaska using 25 years of space-borne SAR imagery. Remote sensing of environment,
209, 660-676.
[5] Walter, K. M., Engram, M., Duguay, C. R., Jeffries, M. O., & Chapin III, F. S. (2008). The Potential Use
of Synthetic Aperture Radar for Estimating Methane Ebullition From Arctic Lakes 1. JAWRA Journal of the
American Water Resources Association, 44(2), 305-315.
[6] Shakhova, N., Semiletov, I., & Panteleev, G. (2005). The distribution of methane on the Siberian Arctic
shelves: Implications for the marine methane cycle. Geophysical Research Letters, 32(9).
3