A Way Toward Low-Carbon Shipping: Improving
Port Operations Planning using Machine Learning
Sara El Mekkaoui
Équipe AMIPS
École Mohammadia d’Ingénieurs
Mohammed V University in Rabat
Rabat, Morocco
saraelmekkaoui@research.emi.ac.maLoubna Benabbou
Management Sciences Department
Université du Québec à Rimouski
Lévis, Qc, Canada
loubna_benabbou@uqar.ca
Abdelaziz Berrado
Équipe AMIPS
École Mohammadia d’Ingénieurs
Mohammed V University in Rabat
Rabat, Morocco
berrado@emi.ac.ma
Abstract
Despite being the most carbon-efﬁcient way of transportation, shipping is an
important contributor to air pollution especially in coastal areas. The sector’s impact
on the environment still need mitigation, through different measures undertaken
so far. Operational optimization of ports and ships is a step in shipping progress
towards reducing the pollution. The main purpose of this research is to reduce
the degree of error and uncertainty of some operational parameters using Machine
Learning models, and provide port managers with accurate information to assist
them in their decision-making process. Therefore, they will be able to manage
ships speed and port times for a better monitoring of ships emissions during sea
voyage and port stay.
1 Shipping and climate change:
Over 80% of international trade by volume is carried by ships, and relatively speaking, they are the
most fuel-efﬁcient means of transportation in terms of g CO 2/ton-km [1]. However, the sector has a
signiﬁcant carbon footprint as a whole, especially international shipping accounting for 2.02% of
global CO 2emissions in 2018 [ 2]. No particular economies are directly held liable for this emissions
source, that being so, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) takes the lead to reduce shipping
emissions. IMO is the specialized agency of the United Nations which is responsible for the technical
regulation of maritime transport, in particular the prevention and control of pollution engendered by
ships. By taking actions to mitigate climate change, IMO supports the UN Sustainable Development
Goal 13, and contribute to the global ﬁght against climate change.
IMO has just released the ﬁnal report of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) study [ 2], stating that shipping share
of global CO 2emissions increased from 2.76% in 2012 to 2.89% in 2018. Total maritime transport
GHG emissions increased by 9.6% from 977 million tons in 2012 to 1076 million tons in 2018.
However, IMO’s ongoing efforts toward low-carbon shipping were reﬂected by 10% lower emissions
level in 2018 compared to 2008, although seaborne trade increased by 40% in the same period.
Despite further efﬁciency gains, the study forecasts that 2050 shipping emissions will increase by up
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.to 50% over 2018 levels, as a result of the high prediction in transport demand. Furthermore, shipping
is still responsible of important emissions of other relevant substances. Annual global contribution is
estimated to be 13% in Sulfur Oxides (SO x) as most marine fuels has high sulfur content, and 15%
in Nitrogen Oxides (NO x) [3]. Shipping emissions have a signiﬁcant impact on human health and
were responsible for approximately 400 000 premature deaths from lung cancer and cardiovascular
diseases and 14 million childhood asthma cases annually; measures such as adopting low sulfur
fuel in shipping would save 266 300 lives from premature death in 2020 [ 4]. For instance, between
14 500 and 37 500 premature deaths were caused by shipping in East Asia during 2013 [ 5]. The
health impact of ship emissions is particularly concentrated in dense coastal areas, as most of ships
emissions are generated during routine operations such as in-port activities, with approximately 70%
of ships emissions happening within 400 km of coastlines [6, 7].
In order to minimize maritime pollution, the IMO developed the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships called MARPOL [ 8], with requirements regarding dumping, oil
and air pollution. With the purpose of further minimizing airborne emissions from ships, a number of
regulations have been deﬁned under MARPOL. The actions include the introduction of Emission
Control Areas to reduce air pollutants in speciﬁc regions and the use of low sulfur fuel oil to become
effective from 01 January 2020 [ 9]. Two major actions were added in 2011 about energy efﬁciency
of ships [ 10]. The ﬁrst is the Energy Efﬁciency Design Index (EEDI), a mandatory technical measure
for new ships, and the second is the Ship Energy Efﬁciency Plan (SEEMP) which is an operational
measure to monitor ships energy efﬁciency. The SEEMP is based on a wide range of measures to
increase energy efﬁciency either from ship design or operations. One of the operational measures is
voyage optimization, including all the actions for optimizing ship operations considering logistics,
scheduling, and contractual constraints, and this measure can itself achieve 1 to 10% savings in CO2
emissions [ 11]. V oyage optimization includes just-in-time arrivals policy, which aim is to make
ships reach their port destination at a revised arrival time when delays are detected at port. The
implementation of just-in-time arrivals require a commitment from all stakeholders to improve the
ship-shore relationship, as well as an amenable operation model. IMO is pushing for the adoption of
just-in-time ships operations through its public-private partnership initiative the GIoMEEP Global
Industry Alliance [ 12], which focuses on measures to overcome operational and contractual barriers.
The importance of just-in-time sailing is shown by the results of a study commissioned by the Port of
Rotterdam Authority and the TNO research institute (Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientiﬁc
Research) [ 13]. According to the study, keeping ships updated accurately about berthing times enable
them to adjust their speed and lower their gas emissions. Moreover, further reduction is feasible
through shortening waiting time at the port area. The study found that for the Port of Rotterdam,
adopting just-in-time arrivals could help avoiding 4% or 134 000 tons of CO 2emissions every year
from containerships activity. For the waiting times, the study found that shortening the waiting time
of bulkers by 12 hours could reduce the emissions by 35% or 188 000 tons of CO 2. In another
evaluation, for a particular voyage, the application of just-in-time measure led to 23% less fuel
consumption compared to usual practice [ 14]. However, the implementation of this measure may
be difﬁcult, as it depends on many uncertain parameters. This implementation requires updating
arriving ships with their estimated time of berthing. Also, the time spent by previous ships must be
determined with precision. To do that, cooperation is needed between different actors in order to
control the time needed for different tasks executed at berth.
Operational optimization is an important element in the maritime decarbonization challenge. Adopting
new technologies and green fuels with high expenditure can have a huge impact on shipping global
carbon footprint, but would also take too much time to implement. Achieving short-term performance
is otherwise possible, by adopting efﬁcient operations at the port and ship levels. In this context, we
want to take a further step in the effort to reduce emissions from maritime transport, by improving
port operations planning and scheduling using Machine Learning. This application will help in
implementing just-in-time arrivals to respond to air quality issues experienced in coastal areas.
Adopting such approach not only supports the attainment of the UN Sustainable Development Goal
13 related to climate action, but also Goal 12 of responsible consumption and production, both at the
port and the ship levels.
Our application will focus ﬁrst on a North African port located in Morocco, but will be extended
subsequently to include other ports. Morocco is one of the most committed countries to ﬁght
against climate change. Ranked third after Sweden and Denmark according to the Climate Change
Performance Index 2020, Morocco has recently invested vastly in renewable energies [ 15]. On another
2note, with 60% of the population and 90% of the industry located along coastlines [ 16], an effort for
reducing shipping emissions in coastal areas will be more than welcome. Our work will contribute to
reduce harmful emissions to air from ships, the measures are expected to have a signiﬁcant beneﬁcial
impact on the atmospheric environment and on health, particularly for communities living nearby the
port area (2 million people). Our work will also establish a methodology for assessing the emissions
generated by ships under the just-in-time policy.
2 Improving port operations planning and scheduling using Machine
Learning:
Ports are considered as complex systems in which many actors interact to achieve the objective of
loading and unloading ships. Optimization models and Machine Learning have been successfully
used to improve port operations efﬁciency and reduce emissions, through applications using real-time
data from the landside and the seaside [ 17]. Port terminals rely on optimization models to manage
their operations, but they are still affected by many disruptions, in particular, the uncertainty related
to service time and ships arrival time [ 18]. To improve operations management and planning models,
Machine Learning can be used to help monitoring operational parameters [ 19]. Therefore, to assist the
implementation of just-in-time arrivals, we propose a supporting system to improve port operations
planning and scheduling, that would be easily adaptable to any port. This system will forecast ships
arrival time and berth productivity in order to provide reliable planning and optimize ship’s speed
accordingly. We also suggest monitoring ships emissions and emphasize avoided emissions as an
impact of the application of just-in-time arrivals. We will use two maritime data sources, Automatic
Identiﬁcation System (AIS) data and port operations data. AIS is a vessel tracking system that
provides regular updates on a vessel’s movement and other relevant ship voyage. Data is available
and can be obtained from governmental and open source providers as well as private and commercial
sources [ 20]. Information about port operations will be provided by port terminal operators and port
authorities. The data include historical details of port calls, berth schedules and times spent by ships
at port. The work presented here comprise three modules that will assist terminal operations planning:
•Ships arrival time prediction : from a dynamic perspective, we will provide real-time
prediction of ships arrival time, thus updating the prediction when needed for a thorough
monitoring of the operations. The proposed framework is based on Deep Learning models
as they are a promising tool for the prediction of arrival times. We will combine ships
trajectory data from AIS and weather conditions to improve the prediction. The challenge
would be to ﬁnd a generic solution dealing with different types of ships and trajectories.
•Berth productivity estimation : operations at berth are affected by several factors leading
to variations in loading and unloading rates or berth productivity. Disruptions can come
from weather conditions such as wind and tides, human strikes, machine breakdowns and
many others. Being able to forecast berth productivity will reduce the variation of time
spent at berth and provide a better visibility on future operations. We want to work on a
system based on historical operational data with capability of learning from past events
to provide good estimate of berth productivity. Our system will be based on data from
terminal operators and Machine Learning models. For that, we will use data about past berth
schedules and operations records, these documents may vary from port to port, but they
contain more or less the same information. Berth schedules are usually a graphic document
similar to Gantt charts, representing ships at quays with estimated time of arrival, berthing
and departure, number of cranes, berth number and ship length. Operations reports are
documents where details about each port call are recorded. This report contains information
about ships, handled cargo, tonnage, operations suspension and related causes.
•Emissions monitoring : We will set up a suitable port related performance indicator of
energy efﬁciency that will reﬂect ships emissions changes as a result of the application
of just-in time arrivals. Activity based emissions inventory will be performed as per
Canada’s National Marine Emissions Inventory Tool [ 21] approach. This method is based
on ships trajectory data from AIS and Coast Guard information system, associated to engine
and vessel details to provide accurate estimation of emissions. The proposed indicator
will characterize the port-related activity as a responsive tool reﬂecting daily practices
performance.
3References
[1]R. Sims, R. Schaeffer, F. Creutzig, X. Cruz-Núñez, M. D’Agosto, D. Dimitriu, M.J. Figueroa
Meza, L. Fulton, S. Kobayashi, O. Lah, A. McKinnon, P. Newman, M. Ouyan, J.J. Schauer, D.
Sperling, and G. Tiwari, “Transport,” in Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change , O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y . Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner,
K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S.
Schlömer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx, Ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2014, ch. 8.
[2]IMO, Fourth IMO Greenhouse Gas Study 2020: Reduction of GHG emissions from ships .
London: International Maritime Organization (IMO), 2020.
[3]IMO, Third IMO Greenhouse Gas Study 2014: Safe, secure and efﬁcient shipping on ocean .
London: International Maritime Organization (IMO), 2014.
[4]M. Soﬁev, J. J. Winebrake, L. Johansson, E. W. Carr, M. Prank, J. Soares, J. Vira, R. Kouznetsov,
J.-P. Jalkanen, and J. J. Corbett, “Cleaner fuels for ships provide public health beneﬁts with
climate tradeoffs,” Nature Communications , vol. 9, p. 406, 2018.
[5]H. Liu, M. Fu, X. Jin, Y . Shang, D. Shindell, G. Faluvegi, C. Shindell, and K. He, “Health and
climate impacts of ocean-going vessels in east asia,” Nature Climate Change , vol. 6, no. 11, pp.
1037–1041, 2016.
[6]S. K. Ng, C. Loh, C. Lin, V . Booth, J. W. Chan, A. C. Yip, Y . Li, and A. K. Lau, “Policy change
driven by an AIS-assisted marine emission inventory in hong kong and the pearl river delta,”
Atmospheric Environment , vol. 76, pp. 102–112, 2013.
[7]S. Song, “Ship emissions inventory, social cost and eco-efﬁciency in Shanghai Yangshan port,”
Atmospheric Environment , vol. 82, pp. 288–297, 2014.
[8]IMO, “Inernational convention for the prevention of pollution from ships
MARPOL,” http://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/ListOfConventions/Pages/
International-Convention-for-the-Prevention-of-Pollution-from-Ships-(MARPOL).aspx,
accessed: 2020-09-13.
[9]IMO. Inernational convention for the prevention of pollution from ships MARPOL - Annex
VI Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships. http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/
PollutionPrevention/AirPollution/Pages/Air-Pollution.aspx. Accessed: 2020-09-13.
[10] IMO, “Inernational convention for the prevention of pollution from ships MARPOL -
Annex VI - Energy Efﬁciency Measures,” http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/environment/
pollutionprevention/airpollution/pages/technical-and-operational-measures.aspx, accessed:
2020-09-13.
[11] Ø. Buhaug, J. Corbett, Ø. Endresen, V . Eyring, J. Faber, S. Hanayama, D. Lee, D. Lee,
H. Lindstad, A. Markowska, A. Mjelde, D. Nelissen, J. Nilsen, C. Pålsson, J. Winebrake, W. Wu,
and K. Yoshida, Second IMO Study 2009 . London: International Maritime Organization
(IMO), 2009.
[12] GLoMEEP, “Global maritime energy efﬁciency partnerships,” https://glomeep.imo.org/, ac-
cessed: 2020-09-10.
[13] Port of Rotterdam, “‘Just-in-time’ sailing saves hundreds of thousands of
tonnes of CO2,” https://www.portofrotterdam.com/en/news-and-press-releases/
just-in-time-sailing-saves-hundreds-of-thousands-of-tonnes-of-co2, accessed: 2020-09-12.
[14] Port of Rotterdam, “Desktop just-in-time trial yields positive results in cut-
ting emissions,” https://www.portofrotterdam.com/en/news-and-press-releases/
desktop-just-in-time-trial-yields-positive-results-in-cutting-emissions, accessed: 2020-
09-12.
4[15] Climate Change Performance Index 2020, https://www.climate-change-performance-index.org/,
accessed: 2020-09-10.
[16] United States Agency for International Development, “Climate risk proﬁle - Morocco,”
https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/ﬁles/asset/document/2016_USAID_Climate%
20Risk%20Proﬁle%20-%20Morocco.pdf, accessed: 2020-09-17.
[17] P. Cammin, M. Sarhani, L. Heilig, and S. V oß, “Applications of real-time data to reduce air
emissions in maritime ports,” in International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction .
Springer, 2020, pp. 31–48.
[18] C. Bierwirth and F. Meisel, “A follow-up survey of berth allocation and quay crane scheduling
problems in container terminals,” European Journal of Operational Research , vol. 244, no. 3,
pp. 675–689, 2015.
[19] L. Heilig, R. Stahlbock, and S. V oß, “From digitalization to data-driven decision making in
container terminals,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.13251 , 2019.
[20] Marine Index of Open Datasets, “AIS data sources,” https://mods.marin.nl/display/MIOD/AIS+
Data+Sources, accessed: 2020-09-10.
[21] Marine Emissions Inventory Tool, https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/
services/managing-pollution/marine-emissions-inventory-tool.html, accessed: 2020-09-23.
5