PREDISM: Pre-Disaster Modelling With CNN
Ensembles for At-Risk Communities
Vishal Anand
Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, Washington, USA
vishal.anand@columbia.eduYuki Miura
Columbia University
New York, New York, USA
yuki.miura@columbia.edu
Abstract
The machine learning community has recently had increased interest in the climate
and disaster damage domain due to a marked increase in occurrences of natural
hazards (e.g., hurricanes, forest ﬁres, ﬂoods, earthquakes). However, not enough at-
tention has been devoted to mitigating probable destruction from impending natural
hazards. We explore this crucial space by predicting building-level damages on a
before-the-fact basis that would allow state actors and non-governmental organiza-
tions to be best equipped with resource distribution to minimize or preempt losses.
We introduce PREDISMthat employs an ensemble of ResNets and fully connected
layers over decision trees to capture image-level and meta-level information to
accurately estimate weakness of man-made structures to disaster-occurrences. Our
model performs well and is responsive to tuning across types of disasters and
highlights the space of preemptive hazard damage modelling.
1 Introduction
1.1 Natural Hazard Threats and Climate Risk
Natural hazards have been humanity’s threats throughout the world over the years, and such threats
would worsen as the climate changes (Tippett, 2018). Speciﬁcally, sea-level rise could amplify
ﬂooding threats and leave low-elevated coastal regions under sea-level permanently (Marsooli et al.,
2019; Miura et al., 2021b); warm and dry conditions cause severe and vast wildﬁres, and such
ﬁres could frequently occur as global warming extends ﬁre seasons in the future (Halofsky et al.,
2020); more extreme rainfalls are expected due to warming climate (Knutson et al., 2015) and the
slow-downed tropical cyclones which are also caused by global warming (Kossin, 2018). These
threats are some of the many outcomes of changing climate. The regions with little or no hazard
occurrences in the past may be devastated by ampliﬁed hazards (Miura et al., 2021a). Such natural
hazards affect millions of people and cost billions of dollars (He and Cha, 2018; Kreibich et al., 2019).
Given the limited resources, it is critical to predict and prepare effectively for future hazards in order
to mitigate their threats (Miura et al., 2021c). Understanding the nature of threats (i.e., magnitude,
frequency) could allow proper preparedness and a quicker recovery. For example, stakeholders and
communities could implement a proper protective measure (e.g., barriers) or strategy (e.g., evacuation
plan, insurance) against future hazards.
1.2 Hazard Damage Studies with Machine Learning
The machine-learning community has been very interested in disaster damage domain in the context
of climate change. For example, Crisis-DIAS from Agarwal et al. (2020) uses multi-modal platforms
to consolidate post-disaster damage-levels across information sources, while Zhang et al. (2020)
discusses human-in-loop entities to accurately estimate post-disaster damages. The work in Chen
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Sydney, Australia.(2020) explores convolution neural networks (CNNs) and hyper-parameters to merge pre-disaster and
post-disaster images together for the same.
Unlike most previous studies that use machine learning in the space of building damage and climate
change (Agarwal et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Chen, 2020), which focus on after-the-fact damage
estimation of a natural hazard occurrence, we introduce PREDISM, which models susceptibility of
buildings, landscapes, and habitats for a future calamity. Forecasting the future risks allows residents
and governments to take stock of situations with an appropriate contingency fund, facilities, and
preparedness. PREDISMdoesn’t depend on disaster occurrence, rather it predicts damages that could
happen from a future hazard with a given intensity. This is highly beneﬁcial to affected communities
if the future hazard risk, given the climate risk, could be identiﬁed without the massive past data but
with the current community’s information (e.g., present satellite imagery over the area). For instance,
identifying building damage levels prior to a hazard of an arbitrary magnitude hitting the area would
provide an insight to the stakeholders and communities. Our models are ﬁne-tuned on disaster-type
open-source building datasets (Gupta et al., 2019), along with adjoining unifying fully connected
layers activated with meta-information to generate building-level hazard-level risks of future damage.
2 Methodology
2.1 Data Schema
We use the xBD dataset from Gupta et al. (2019) that serve as the basis of ﬁne-tuning our ensemble
model. The xBD data is spread across ﬁfteen countries and 45,361 square kilometers that equate
to 850,736 individual buildings’ data. The 30 GB of data is manually appended by quite a few
meta-information (additional details in Appendix).
Additional information is gleaned for xBD building images that include damage-levels incurred on
past occurrences serving the purpose of training our model ensemble predictor. Each damage-level is
classiﬁed into one of "unclassiﬁed", "no damage", "minor damage", "major damage", or "destroyed".
During inference using PREDISM, when enough information is not available to make a classiﬁcation,
we would mark them as unclassiﬁed. However, we discard such data from our training samples so
as to avoid model from accidentally misdiagnosing buildings’ risk levels in the absence of enough
information. Despite the presence of post-disaster xBD images, we can’t use them in our modelling,
since our problem requires before-the-fact building-damage modelling on any given satellite imagery.
2.2 Data treatment
Figure 1a depicts our data processing ﬂow, while Figure 1b describes how granularity is maintained
across training and inference. Thirty GB worth of data samples from xBD are split into disaster-types
and images within each types are grouped into event-types (e.g., individual hazard occurrences). Each
event’s image in the dataset comes tagged with building boundaries, that can also be auto-generated
for unseen images using Zhao et al. (2018). Each given image of dimensions (x y) may contain
nnumber of buildings (potentially hundreds), wherein each building-boundary creates separate
individual images consisting of just their corresponding buildings using image masks - so nbuilding
masks create nindividual images with (x y) dimensions of stand-alone buildings to ensure our model
does not cross associate damage levels of nearby buildings. This ensures tight coupling of individual
buildings with corresponding damage level prediction, as opposed to general damage prediction in a
geography. This also ensures our dataset is ampliﬁed despite the lack of ample data.
‘Disaster-types’ include earthquake, ﬁre, ﬂood, hurricane, tornado, tsunami, and volcanic eruption
and ‘disaster-levels’ vary from 1 to 5, where 5 is the worst case. These levels are deﬁned using impact
values in Federal Ofﬁce of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance (2011), accounting for factors
like fatality/injury rate, impaired area, economic loss and supply disruption. The mean of meta-inputs
represents the overall hazard level and is appended to our data processing pipeline. During inference,
since hazards haven’t occurred, we use varying hazard-levels to create future damage maps (Figure 2).
2.3 Modelling
We take the Residual Network (ResNet) (He et al., 2016) class of convolutional neural networks that
are initially pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) comprised of multi-faceted
2set of 14 million images. Multiple copies of these ResNet models are then taken and joined together
via a decision tree, such that each ResNet model is best responsive to corresponding disaster types
that we achieve through ﬁne-tuning. We use multiple ResNet sized models with corresponding loss
functions such as cross-entropy, and ordinal-cross-entropy during ﬁne-tuning. Our setup comprised
of RTX 2080-Ti (12 GiB) and v3-8 TPU-node (8 TPU cores, 128 GiB). As our experiments evolved
across ResNet-18, ResNet-34 and ResNet-50, epoch times increased signiﬁcantly (e.g., ResNet-34
took 76 minutes per epoch that equates to 25.33 hours for 20 epochs). Thus, we perform experiments
with the ﬁrst two ResNets using Adam optimizer with learning-rate 0.001, gamma of 0.1, learning-
rate-decay step-size of 7, and trained over 20 epochs.
Figure 1c is the schematic representation of our model ensemble. Firstly, an input satellite image
is parsed into individual building masks that are applied independently to produce multiple images
having one-building-per-image. Then, the ‘suggested’ input from climate-scientists comprising of
meta-information (such as disaster-type, fatality, land impairment, disruption time) and corresponding
future hazard-level decide which ﬁne-tuned ResNet models to select. The ensemble model allows for
multiple ﬁne-tuned ResNet models to kick-in (e.g., if two natural hazards usually co-occur, ensemble
would assign importance-weights to these two ResNets as learnt from past data). Finally the outputs
of ResNet CNN are activated through softmax layers to output damage-levels ranging from 1-5.
We found that rather than adding meta-data to pixel data as mentioned in Chen (2020) which would
eventually get diluted; we should process them outside of ResNets. This leads to a marked accuracy
increase since meta-information is already in condensed format and in a different vector-space. Thus,
we combine them with the ResNet output after passing through fully connected layers to produce the
ﬁnal damage-level forecast. This allows accurate ﬁne-tuning of the entire ensemble, else we would
need much larger dataset before a ResNet learns that the appended meta-input is, in fact, not a pixel.
(a) Data Schema Flow
 (b) Model data usage
(c) Model inference on non-disaster images (meta-details in Appendix)
Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the data in context of inference.
3(a) Hazard Level 3
 (b) Hazard Level 4
 (c) Hazard Level 5
Figure 2: Qualitative ﬂooding damage prediction ( x=lat,y=lng) without earlier disasters: Nepal
3 Results and Discussion
PREDISMachieves 79.24% accuracy (Table 1) and has a marked improvement in future building
damage predictions, despite the inherent hardness of the problem since we have no disaster data
during inference, and are carrying out preemptive modelling of future hazard of a given intensity.
Figure 2 is the predicted output format for these varying hazard levels.
Despite the core differences in the problem being investigated by Chen (2020); Agarwal et al. (2020);
Zhang et al. (2020), we realize Chen (2020) is a reasonable comparison for our experiments since
they discuss the aspects on a pre-disaster level. An interesting point to note is the improvement
gained over Chen (2020) by our altered data treatment. We use individual building-masks to create
corresponding images of same input sizes, doing away with the uneven building size problem. We
also use meta-data like disaster-types, hazard-levels with decision tree and fully connected layers
as opposed to appending directly into building images, since they are inherently in different data-
representation vector-spaces because meta-information are condensed event representations. These
are not suitable for CNNs like ResNets, while image-data are on a red-blue-green level which may or
may not yield actionable information. Accuracy calculation leverages gold (post-disaster) data only
for checking model performance, and never during inferencing/training of input image.
PREDISM’s output in Figure 2 would serve as an excellent guide to ofﬁcials to prepare for impending
disasters for varying levels of hazards over frequent satellite image-datasets. The affected commu-
nity’s damage could signiﬁcantly vary depending on the ground surface property. For example, the
presence of wetlands could work as a bumper by slowing down currents and reducing the impact
of tsunami and ﬂoods considerably. Consequently, it is easy to imagine the corresponding damage
would be minor compared to the area without such a bumper. For the future model, it is encouraged
to include such geographical features as well. Our results suggest a pre-disposition of buildings
and area-conditions to have predictive damage-risk that can be analyzed with manually-controlled
potential disaster’s intensities to better prepare for unforeseen calamity and avoidable anguish.
MODEL LOSS-FUNCTION ACCURACY
PREDISMRESNET-18 Cross-Entropy 78.38 %
PREDISMRESNET-34 Cross-Entropy 79.24 %
Chen postCross-Entropy 59.50 %
Ordinal Cross-Entropy 64.20 %
Table 1: Prediction inference on non-disaster images
4 Conclusion
Our work introduces a new paradigm of working towards climate damage preemptive preparedness.
PREDISMuses disaster-type speciﬁc ﬁne-tuned convolution neural networks of ResNets wrapped
into ensembles over fully connected layers and decision trees on non-disaster afﬂicted satellite
images, along with adaptive damage-levels map-outputs sensitive to potential hazard intensity from
government ofﬁcials. This demonstrates marked accuracy gains over other models in similar settings
and would serve as a guideline to decrease damage potential on a rolling basis. Stakeholders and
administrators can effectively plan mitigations for future disasters using our model.
4References
Agarwal, M., Leekha, M., Sawhney, R., and Shah, R. R. (2020). Crisis-dias: Towards multimodal damage
analysis - deployment, challenges and assessment. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 34(01):346–353.
Chen, T. Y . (2020). Interpretability in convolutional neural networks for building damage classiﬁcation in
satellite imagery. Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020 .
Federal Ofﬁce of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance (2011). Method of Risk Analysis for Civil Protection .
Federal Ofﬁce of Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance.
Gupta, R., Goodman, B., Patel, N., Hosfelt, R., Sajeev, S., Heim, E., Doshi, J., Lucas, K., Choset, H., and Gaston,
M. (2019). Creating xbd: A dataset for assessing building damage from satellite imagery. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops .
Halofsky, J. E., Peterson, D. L., and Harvey, B. J. (2020). Changing wildﬁre, changing forests: the effects of
climate change on ﬁre regimes and vegetation in the paciﬁc northwest, usa. Fire Ecology , 16(1):4.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 770–778.
He, X. and Cha, E. J. (2018). Modeling the damage and recovery of interdependent critical infrastructure systems
from natural hazards. Reliability engineering & System safety , 177:162–175.
Knutson, T. R., Sirutis, J. J., Zhao, M., Tuleya, R. E., Bender, M., Vecchi, G. A., Villarini, G., and Chavas, D.
(2015). Global projections of intense tropical cyclone activity for the late twenty-ﬁrst century from dynamical
downscaling of cmip5/rcp4. 5 scenarios. Journal of Climate , 28(18):7203–7224.
Kossin, J. P. (2018). A global slowdown of tropical-cyclone translation speed. Nature , 558(7708):104–107.
Kreibich, H., Thaler, T., Glade, T., and Molinari, D. (2019). Preface: Damage of natural hazards: assessment
and mitigation. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences , 19(3):551–554.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural
networks. Communications of the ACM , 60:84 – 90.
Marsooli, R., Lin, N., Emanuel, K., and Feng, K. (2019). Climate change exacerbates hurricane ﬂood hazards
along us atlantic and gulf coasts in spatially varying patterns. Nature communications , 10(1):1–9.
Miura, Y ., Dinenis, P. C., Mandli, K. T., Deodatis, G., and Bienstock, D. (2021a). Optimization of coastal
protections in the presence of climate change. Frontiers in Climate , 3:83.
Miura, Y ., Mandli, K. T., and Deodatis, G. (2021b). High-speed gis-based simulation of storm surge–induced
ﬂooding accounting for sea level rise. Natural Hazards Review , 22(3):04021018.
Miura, Y ., Qureshi, H., Ryoo, C., Dinenis, P. C., Li, J., Mandli, K. T., Deodatis, G., Bienstock, D., Lazrus, H.,
and Morss, R. (2021c). A methodological framework for determining an optimal coastal protection strategy
against storm surges and sea level rise. Natural Hazards , 107(2):1821–1843.
Tippett, M. K. (2018). Extreme weather and climate.
Zhang, D. Y ., Huang, Y ., Zhang, Y ., and Wang, D. (2020). Crowd-assisted disaster scene assessment with human-
ai interactive attention. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 34(03):2717–2724.
Zhao, K., Kang, J., Jung, J., and Sohn, G. (2018). Building extraction from satellite images using mask r-cnn
with building boundary regularization. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , pages 242–2424.
5A Appendix
Table 2: Hazard Dataset.
HAZARD TYPE LOCATION /NAME YEAR
EARTHQUAKE MEXICO CITY 2017
WILDFIRESANTA ROSA, CA 2017
PINERY 2015
PORTUGAL 2017
WOOLSEY , CA 2018
FLOODMIDWEST , US 2019
NEPAL 2017
HURRICANEFLORENCE 2018
HARVEY 2017
MATTHEW 2016
MICHAEL 2018
TORNADOJOPLIN , MO 2011
MOORE , OK 2013
TUSCALOOSA , AL 2011
TSUNAMIPALU, INDONESIA 2018
SUNDA , INDONESIA 2018
VOLCANIC ERUPTIONGUATEMALA 2018
LOWER PUNA 2018
Table 3: Hazard Levels as a function of attributes
ATTRIBUTESHAZARD LEVEL
5 4 3 2 1
Fatality >10000 >1000 >100 >10 >1
Injury >100000 >10000 >1000 >100 >10
Land Impaired (km2) >500 >100 >50 >10 >1
Direct Damage (billion USD) >100 >10 >1 >0.1 >0.01
Indirect Damage (billion USD) >100 >10 >1 >0.1 >0.01
Water Disruption (days) >30 >14 >7 >3 >1
Energy Disruption (days) >30 >14 >7 >3 >1
6