Quantifying the presence of air pollutants over a road
network in high spatio-temporal resolution
Matteo Böhm
Sapienza University
Rome, Italy
bohm@diag.uniroma1.itMirco Nanni
ISTI - CNR
Pisa, Italy
mirco.nanni@isti.cnr.it
Luca Pappalardo
ISTI - CNR
Pisa, Italy
luca.pappalardo@isti.cnr.it
Abstract
Monitoring air pollution plays a key role when trying to reduce its impact on the
environment and on human health. Traditionally, two main sources of information
about the quantity of pollutants over a city are used: monitoring stations at ground-
level (when available), and satellites’ remote sensing. In addition to these two,
other methods have been developed in the last years that aim at understanding
how trafﬁc emissions behave in space and time at a ﬁner scale, taking into account
the human mobility patterns. We present a simple and versatile framework for
estimating the quantity of four air pollutants (CO 2, NO x, PM, VOC) emitted by
private vehicles moving on a road network, starting from raw GPS traces and
information about vehicles’ fuel type, and use this framework for analyses on how
such pollutants distribute over the road networks of different cities.
1 Introduction
The estimation of the distribution of pollutants over space and time is a major challenge, that
concerns both climate change and human health. In some cities, air pollution generated from vehicles’
emissions has become more and more evident, to the point that a temporary interruption of the normal
trafﬁc ﬂows like during the COVID-19’s lockdown immediately resulted in an outstanding increase in
air quality [1, 2, 3, 4]. Even if some noticed that this relatively brief period will basically do nothing to
slow down climate change [5], it helped in outlining how evident the impact of the emissions related
to the transportation sector is in everyday life. At national level, the share of total GHG (Greenhouse
Gases) emissions coming from transportation arrives at 30% in high income economies, and 72% of
the direct GHG emissions caused by the transport sector worldwide in 2010 was from road travel [6].
Moreover, the transport sector also emits non-CO 2pollutants such as nitrogen oxides (NO x), that
lead to the formation of ozone and particulate matter (PM), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs);
these pollutants, emitted by internal combustion engines, also play a fundamental role in changing
climate and are dangerous for human health [6]. For these reasons, understanding the way pollutants
emitted by vehicles spread over a city is extremely important in designing strategies to reduce the
share of emissions coming from transportation. As suggested in the literature [7, 8], big data and
machine learning offer the tools to implement crucial strategies such as reducing transport activity,
improving vehicle efﬁciency, alternative fuels and electriﬁcation, and shifting to lower-carbon options.
It is also clear that they are strictly related to the way vehicles move through a road network, thus it
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.becomes fundamental to conceive tools that can help in studying how the resulting emissions patterns
evolve in space and time.
Emissions from vehicles have traditionally been studied with the use of measured (either coming from
sensors [9], from ofﬁcial sources like Ministries of Transportation [10], resulting from household
travel surveys [11], or from experiments using driving simulators [12]) or simulated [13, 14] trafﬁc
data. A considerable number of works concentrated on estimating people’s exposure to air pollution
using a wide range of models (see [15] for a review), often integrating them with mobility data
coming from mobile phones in order to reach a dynamic assessment of the exposure [16, 17, 18, 19,
20]. This dynamic approach has also been adopted in some cases in estimating vehicles’ emissions.
In [21, 22] emissions are directly measured with a Portable Emissions Measurement System (PEMS)
including a GPS to analyse gaseous emissions of a few vehicles driving in real-world conditions,
while both Nyhan et al. [23] and Liu et al. [24] estimate vehicles’ emissions with a microscopic
emissions model using taxis’ GPS trajectory data coming respectively from Singapore and Hangzhou.
Chen et al. [25] use GPS trajectories coming from a navigation app and focus the analysis on braking
emissions of particulate matter in Tokyo. Yu et al. [26] use mobile phone GPS data to determine the
position of customised bus stops and to estimate the emission reduction potential of the resulting bus
lines. Sui et al. [27] ﬁnd evidence for understanding the advantage of online ride-hailing against
traditional taxis w.r.t. fuel consumption and emissions, using GPS data provided by taxis and a
ride-hailing company moving in Chengdu (China). The use of data coming from positioning systems
directly installed on the vehicles allows to include in the models factors coming from real-world
driving conditions, like acceleration and speed, that have been proved to play a fundamental role
especially when estimating emissions of NO x[22], thus reaching more accurate results. However,
these experiments often are conducted on a small sample of vehicles, or on biased ones (e.g., taxi
ﬂeet, high-duty vehicles). Moreover, they also seem to suffer from a geographical bias, as almost all
of them are carried out in Asian cities [19, 17, 23, 24, 21, 25, 26, 27] (mostly in China and Japan).
The aim of this study is to present a versatile framework to estimate the quantity of four diverse
pollutants emitted by private vehicles moving on a road network over time, starting from raw GPS
traces and information about vehicles’ fuel type. Our method can make use of a considerable number
of trajectories coming from real-world vehicles, and it is able to provide a precise idea of the way
air pollutants spread over space and time with a very ﬁne resolution. Indeed, it makes it possible to
visualise how much each road of a network is polluted during a certain period, to study the change in
pollution eventually caused by changes in vehicular mobility over time (e.g., during a lockdown, or
caused by a new infrastructure built in a certain area), to compare vehicles’ behaviour in terms of
emissions across space and time, to analyse the distribution of the quantity of emissions per vehicle
and/or per road across different cities and countries. In a few words, it represents a useful tool for
decision-makers in implementing those strategies aiming at reducing emissions coming from road
travel.
2 Methods
This section brieﬂy describes the proposed framework for estimating the quantity of CO 2, NO x,
PM and VOC emitted by a ﬂeet of vehicles moving in a road network starting from their GPS
trajectories and information about their fuel type. In Fig.1 the framework’s pipeline is shown:
ﬁrstly, instantaneous speed and acceleration of the vehicles are computed in each point of their GPS
trajectories, and some ﬁltering technique is performed on them. Then, the points are mapped to
the edges (i.e. roads) of the network. Finally, a microscopic emissions model is used to estimate
the vehicles’ emissions in each point. Some details of these steps are brieﬂy described in the next
paragraphs.
Figure 1: The steps from raw GPS trajectories of vehicles (a sample of vehicles moving in Rome is
shown on the left) to their emissions over the road network (right).
2Filtering, speed and acceleration The trajectories are stored in a TrajectoryDataFrame , a
data structure from scikit-mobility1[28]. Each point pis associated with the vehicle id
(uid) and the trajectory id ( tid) to which it belongs, with a timestamp t, and with its lati-
tude/longitude position at that time. Note that, in such a way, each point pis uniquely identiﬁed by
(uid, tid, timestamp, lat, lon) . A ﬁrst ﬁltering retains only the sub-trajectories composed
by points that are distant not more than a certain time interval from each other; this is intended to
make the following computation of the instantaneous speed and acceleration of the vehicle in each
point as reliable as possible. Then, once computed, a ﬁltering on these values is performed: only
points in which the vehicle’s speed is not greater than 300 km=h and its acceleration does not exceed
10m=s2are retained (following [23]). It is important to outline that different works use very different
values for these ﬁltering parameters (e.g. the time interval between the points is set to 5 seconds in
[23], 180 seconds in [24], 1 second in [25], 3 seconds in [27]), so these choices are not ﬁxed here and
they can easily be changed.
Map matching The road network is took from OpenStreetMap. Each edge (namely, an OSM
element way) is represented as the couple of OSM node ids of its starting and ending nodes. Each
point pof the trajectory dataset is mapped to its nearest edge in the network with a ball tree nearest-
neighbour algorithm for fast haversine search.
Computing emissions Following Nyhan et al. [23], a microscopic emissions model is implemented
to compute the instantaneous emissions associated to each point p. Some notation is introduced.
The quantity of pollutant j,j2fCO2;NOx;PM;VOCg, emitted at point pis noted as Ep
j. The
instantaneous speed and acceleration of the vehicle in pare respectively noted as vpandap. For each
of the considered vehicles, the information about its engine type (whether they are petrol, diesel or
LPG vehicles) is gathered, as it deﬁnes, together with the type of pollutant and the type of vehicle,
the emission factors f. This data about the vehicle is, just for the sake of notation, resumed by the
letter u. Then, the following equation is used for computing the instantaneous emissions of pollutant
jfrom vehicle uin point p:
Ep;j=fj;u
1+fj;u
2vp+fj;u
3v2
p+fj;u
4ap+fj;u
5a2
p+fj;u
6vpap (1)
where for NO xand VOC emissions the factors f1; :::; f 6change with acceleration (based on whether
ap  0:5m=s2orap< 0:5m=s2).
3 Case study
This section aims at exploring some possible analyses that can be done using the proposed framework,
as well as how it can be improved and extended. The data used here consists in GPS traces from
private vehicles moving in London, Rome and Florence throughout January 2017.
3.1 The distribution of air pollution
With the proposed framework it is very easy to visualise the total quantity of pollutant emitted during a
certain period across a road network. As an example, Fig. 2 shows how much the intrinsic differences
of the road networks of two big cities like London and Rome can inﬂuence how the emissions of CO 2
spread. Indeed, our analyses show that the road network of London has about 3 times the number of
streets of that of Rome, and these streets have an average length of 77 meters (about 25 meters less
than those of Rome): London is about two times denser than Rome both in terms of street density
(i.e. the sum of all the streets’ length divided by the area covered by the network) and intersection
density (i.e. the number of intersections divided by the same area). Obviously, the types of roads
also play a role: the road network of Rome includes a 0.4% of roads tagged as motorways2(which
usually are quite long and large roads), while in London they represent only the 0.02% of the total.
Consequently, air pollutants from vehicular trafﬁc seem to distribute between the roads in a more
equal manner in London than in Rome.
The study of the distribution of air pollution per vehicle reveals a well-known result about its
characteristics; for all the three cities, it follows a power-law (at least for CO 2, NO xand PM): a few
1https://github.com/scikit-mobility/scikit-mobility
2see OpenStreetMap Wiki for more information on road tagging and types.
3(a) Rome.
 (b) London.
Figure 2: The road networks of Rome and London: percentage of CO 2emitted in each road in
January 2017. There are 6.7K vehicles moving in Rome and 2.5K in London.
vehicles are responsible for a great quantity of emissions [29, 30]. Within the vehicles moving in
Rome, Florence and London, for example, 10% of them are responsible for respectively 50%, 52%
and 40% of the total CO 2emitted in January 2017. A novel result, as far as we know, from this study
is represented by the ﬁnding that also the distribution of air pollution per road follows the same rule:
a few roads have the greatest share of emissions in the network. Both in Rome and Florence, only
10% of the roads are associated to more than 90% of the CO 2emitted during the period; in London
this quantity is lower (57%), but still deﬁnitely above the half of the total emissions of CO 2.
In order to support our ﬁnding with a statistical validation, a likelihood-ratio test has been used to
compare various models. The goodness of ﬁt of a power-law has been ﬁrstly compared with that of
an exponential, that is the minimum alternative candidate for evaluating the heavy-tailedness of the
distribution, giving results in favour of the ﬁrst one. In Fig. 3, the power-law is compared with a
truncated power-law, for the two cases of Rome and London. The results suggest that, despite the
outlined differences in the two road networks, in both the cases the distribution of the quantity of
CO2(but also NO xand PM) emitted per road are well approximated by a truncated power-law.
4 Conclusions and future work
The proposed framework is quite simple and ﬂexible as it only relies on GPS traces and information
about fuel types and its parameters can be easily ﬁxed w.r.t. data set and scopes. It has been used to
(a) Rome.
 (b) London.
Figure 3: The complementary CDF of the data on the quantity of CO 2emitted per road, with its best
power-law and truncated power-law ﬁts.
4explore the laws of vehicular air pollution and its spreading over the road network of three different
cities, as well as the relation that this spreading has with the intrinsic characteristics of the network.
In a nutshell, this versatile tool permits to study two main factors driving vehicular emissions: how
people move within the city (the mobility behaviours) and how the infrastructures of the city (the
road network) are conceived to let people move. Thus, the main question that this framework aims to
answer is which of the two, from city to city, can have the major impact in reducing emissions.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
Mirco Nanni has been partially supported by the European Community H2020 programme under the
funding scheme Track & Know (Big Data for Mobility Tracking Knowledge Extraction in Urban
Areas), G.A. 780754, https://trackandknowproject.eu/ . Matteo Böhm has been partially
supported by EU project SoBigData++, G.A. 871042.
References
[1] Fred Dutheil, Julien Baker, and Valentin Navel. “COVID-19 as a factor inﬂuencing air pollu-
tion?” In: Environmental Pollution 263 (Apr. 2020), p. 114466.
[2] Jesse D. Berman and Keita Ebisu. “Changes in U.S. air pollution during the COVID-19
pandemic”. In: Science of The Total Environment 739 (2020), p. 139864.
[3] Zander S. Venter, Kristin Aunan, Sourangsu Chowdhury, and Jos Lelieveld. “COVID-19
lockdowns cause global air pollution declines”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 117.32 (2020), pp. 18984–18990.
[4] Corinne Le Quéré et al. “Temporary reduction in daily global CO2 emissions during the
COVID-19 forced conﬁnement”. In: Nature Climate Change 10 (July 2020), pp. 1–7.
[5] P.M. Forster et al. “Current and future global climate impacts resulting from COVID-19”. In:
Nature Climate Change (2020).
[6] Sims R. et al. “Transport”. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change: Working
Group III Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report . Cambridge University Press,
2014, pp. 599–670.
[7] David Rolnick et al. “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning”. In: CoRR
abs/1906.05433 (2019).
[8] Vasiliki V oukelatou, Lorenzo Gabrielli, Ioanna Miliou, Stefano Cresci, Rajesh Sharma, Mau-
rizio Tesconi, and Luca Pappalardo. “Measuring objective and subjective well-being: di-
mensions and data sources”. In: International Journal of Data Science and Analytics (June
2020).
[9] Priyanka deSouza, Amin Anjomshoaa, Fabio Duarte, Ralph Kahn, Prashant Kumar, and Carlo
Ratti. “Air quality monitoring using mobile low-cost sensors mounted on trash-trucks: Methods
development and lessons learned”. In: Sustainable Cities and Society 60 (2020), p. 102239.
[10] Ariel Reznik, Meidad Kissinger, and Nurit Alfasi. “Real-data-based high-resolution GHG
emissions accounting of urban residents private transportation”. In: International Journal of
Sustainable Transportation 13.4 (2019), pp. 235–244.
[11] Md. Nobinur Rahman and Ahmed O. Idris. “TRIBUTE: Trip-based urban transportation
emissions model for municipalities”. In: International Journal of Sustainable Transportation
11.7 (2017), pp. 540–552.
[12] Sicong Zhu, Inhi Kim, and Keechoo Choi. “High-resolution simulation-based analysis of
leading vehicle acceleration proﬁles at signalized intersections for emission modeling”. In:
International Journal of Sustainable Transportation 0.0 (2020), pp. 1–11.
[13] H. M. Abdul Aziz and Satish V . Ukkusuri. “A novel approach to estimate emissions from
large transportation networks: Hierarchical clustering-based link-driving-schedules for EPA-
MOVES using dynamic time warping measures”. In: International Journal of Sustainable
Transportation 12.3 (2018), pp. 192–204.
[14] Jaehyun (Jason) So, Nassim Motamedidehkordi, Yingjie Wu, Fritz Busch, and Keechoo
Choi. “Estimating emissions based on the integration of microscopic trafﬁc simulation and
vehicle dynamics model”. In: International Journal of Sustainable Transportation 12.4 (2018),
pp. 286–298.
5[15] Xingzhe Xie, Ivana Semanjski, Sidharta Gautama, Evaggelia Tsiligianni, Nikos Deligiannis,
Raj Rajan, Frank Pasveer, and Wilfried Philips. “A Review of Urban Air Pollution Monitoring
and Exposure Assessment Methods”. In: ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 6.12
(2017), p. 389.
[16] Marguerite Nyhan, Itai Kloog, R. Britter, C. Ratti, and Petros Koutrakis. “Quantifying popula-
tion exposure to air pollution using individual mobility patterns inferred from mobile phone
data”. In: Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology 29 (2018).
[17] Haofei Yu, Armistead Russell, James Mulholland, and Zhijiong Huang. “Using cell phone loca-
tion to assess misclassiﬁcation errors in air pollution exposure estimation”. In: Environmental
Pollution 233 (2018), pp. 261–266.
[18] B. Dewulf, T. Neutens, W. Lefebvre, Gerdy Seynaeve, C. Vanpoucke, C. Beckx, and N. van
de Weghe. “Dynamic assessment of exposure to air pollution using mobile phone data”. In:
International Journal of Health Geographics 15 (2016).
[19] Mingxiao Li, Song Gao, Feng Lu, Huan Tong, and Hengcai Zhang. “Dynamic Estimation of
Individual Exposure Levels to Air Pollution Using Trajectories Reconstructed from Mobile
Phone Data”. In: International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 16.22
(2019), p. 4522.
[20] Miguel Picornell, Tomás Ruiz, Rafael Borge, Pedro García-Albertos, David Paz, and Julio
Lumbreras. “Population dynamics based on mobile phone data to improve air pollution
exposure assessments”. In: Journal of Exposure Science & Environmental Epidemiology 29
(2018).
[21] Hwan S. Chong, Sangil Kwon, Yunsung Lim, and Jongtae Lee. “Real-world fuel consumption,
gaseous pollutants, and CO2 emission of light-duty diesel vehicles”. In: Sustainable Cities
and Society 53 (2020), p. 101925.
[22] José M. Luján, Vicente Bermúdez, Vicente Dolz, and Javier Monsalve-Serrano. “An assessment
of the real-world driving gaseous emissions from a Euro 6 light-duty diesel vehicle using a
portable emissions measurement system (PEMS)”. In: Atmospheric Environment 174 (2018),
pp. 112–121.
[23] Marguerite Nyhan et al. “Predicting vehicular emissions in high spatial resolution using
pervasively measured transportation data and microscopic emissions model”. In: Atmospheric
Environment 140 (2016), pp. 352–363.
[24] Jielun Liu, Ke Han, Xiqun (Michael) Chen, and Ghim Ping Ong. “Spatial-temporal infer-
ence of urban trafﬁc emissions based on taxi trajectories and multi-source urban data”. In:
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 106 (2019), pp. 145–165.
[25] Jinyu Chen, Wenjing Li, Haoran Zhang, Wenxiao Jiang, Weifeng Li, Yi Sui, Xuan Song,
and Ryosuke Shibasaki. “Mining urban sustainable performance: GPS data-based spatio-
temporal analysis on on-road braking emission”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 270 (2020),
p. 122489.
[26] Qing Yu, Haoran Zhang, Weifeng Li, Xuan Song, Dongyuan Yang, and Ryosuke Shibasaki.
“Mobile phone GPS data in urban customized bus: Dynamic line design and emission reduction
potentials analysis”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 272 (2020), p. 122471.
[27] Yi Sui et al. “GPS data in urban online ride-hailing: A comparative analysis on fuel consump-
tion and emissions”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 227 (2019), pp. 495–505.
[28] Luca Pappalardo, Filippo Simini, Gianni Barlacchi, and Roberto Pellungrini. scikit-mobility: a
Python library for the analysis, generation and risk assessment of mobility data . 2019.
[29] P.L. Guenther, G.A. Bishop, J.E. Peterson, and D.H. Stedman. “Emissions from 200 000
vehicles: a remote sensing study”. In: Science of The Total Environment 146-147 (1994).
Highway Pollution, pp. 297–302.
[30] Yuhan Huang, Bruce Organ, John L. Zhou, Nic C. Surawski, Guang Hong, Edward F.C. Chan,
and Yat Shing Yam. “Remote sensing of on-road vehicle emissions: Mechanism, applications
and a case study from Hong Kong”. In: Atmospheric Environment 182 (2018), pp. 58–74.
6