Machine Learning-enabled Model-Data Integration
for Predicting Subsurface Water Storage
Dan Lu
Computational Sciences and Engineering Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
lud1@ornl.govEric Pierce
Environmental Sciences Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
pierceem@ornl.gov
Shih-Chieh Kao
Environmental Sciences Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
kaos@ornl.govDavid Womble
Computer Sciences and Mathmatics Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
womblede@ornl.gov
Li Li
Civil and Environmental Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
lxl35@psu.eduDaniella Rempe
Department of Geological Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
rempe@jsg.utexas.edu
Abstract
Subsurface water storage (SWS) is a key variable of the climate system and a
storage component for precipitation and radiation anomalies, inducing persistence
in the climate system. It plays a critical role in climate-change projections and
can mitigate the impacts of climate change on ecosystems. However, because of
the difﬁcult accessibility of the underground, hydrologic properties and dynamics
of SWS are poorly known. Direct observations of SWS are limited, and accurate
incorporation of SWS dynamics into Earth system land models remains challenging.
We propose a machine learning-enabled model-data integration framework to
improve the SWS prediction at local to conus scales in a changing climate by
leveraging all the available observation and simulation resources, as well as to
inform the model development and guide the observation collection. The accurate
prediction will enable an optimal decision of water management and land use and
improve the ecosystem’s resilience to the climate change.
1 Introduction
Subsurface water storage (SWS), including the root zone storage and the rock moisture stored in
weathered bedrock beneath the soil, is a signiﬁcant component of the terrestrial hydrologic cycle
and plays a critical role in droughts [ 4,1]. SWS regulates the timing and magnitude of runoff and
evapotranspiration ﬂuxes; SWS dynamics inﬂuence biogeochemical cycling of carbon and nutrients;
and SWS availability controls aboveground ecosystems by controlling the dominant vegetation and
affects atmospheric circulation by regulating transpiration ﬂuxes [ 18]. However, because of the
difﬁcult accessibility of the underground, hydrologic properties and dynamics of SWS are poorly
known. Limited direct observations of SWS exist [ 11,5], and accurate incorporation of SWS
dynamics into Earth system land models (ELMs) remains challenging [ 6,16]. Here, we seek to
describe how machine learning (ML) can help answer the following questions: (1) What can we
learn about SWS from data (including model-simulated and real measurements)? (2) How does SWS
perform as a mediator of groundwater and streamﬂow and as a reservoir to vegetation and thus to the
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2021atmosphere? (3) How does SWS change across local and continental scales in a changing climate?
Addressing these questions will improve the predictability and understanding of SWS and therefore
its critical role in mitigating the impacts of climate change and associated water cycle extremes on the
ecosystems and many societal sectors including energy production, health, forestry and agriculture.
Improving predictability of SWS requires a large number of data, comprehensive model representation
of SWS dynamics, and sophisticated data-model integration methods for accurate prediction and
effective uncertainty quantiﬁcation [ 12]. However, only limited direct measurements of SWS are
available and current ELMs have inadequate processes representation of SWS dynamics, although
an increasingly broad collection of indirect observations exist and ELMs have increasing resolution
and complexity [ 9]. Additionally, existing data assimilation methods are not powerful enough to
incorporate diverse data for prediction and are not computationally efﬁcient enough to integrate data
streams for updating prediction, and they lack capabilities to quantify various sources of uncertainties
(including meteorological forcing and geological structure uncertainties that control SWS and model
process and parameter uncertainties that relate to modeling) and to identify the data and model limits
to improve the prediction [2, 7].
The main limitation of current data assimilation methods lies in that they focus on the model domain
instead of the data domain. They use observations to ﬁrst estimate model parameters and then use the
calibrated models for prediction [ 3]. With the increase of resolution and complexity of ELMs, these
methods become computationally demanding and, at times, infeasible. Also, because the models tune
parameters to ﬁt the observations by compensating model errors, they are unable to analyze the model
and data limits to predictability. To address these challenges, we propose ML-enabled model-data
integration. In the proposed framework, we focus on data and directly predict SWS from a variety of
data, including model-simulated data, satellite data of geophysical images, and ﬁeld measurements,
such as streamﬂow, topography, permeability, porosity, groundwater table, and rooting depth from a
variety of database supported by many agencies including Department of Energy and U.S. Geological
Survey. We leverage ML’s power in data analytics and predictive analytics to link models with diverse
data for prediction and to analyze model and data limits to inform the model and data development,
thus enhancing predictability and understanding of SWS and its role in integrative water cycle and its
signiﬁcance in improving ecosystem’s resilience to the climate change.
2 Method
The proposed framework consists of three interconnected capabilities (Figure 1): (I) a data-model
informed prediction that links model and data and sufﬁciently extracts their information for prediction
with considering various sources of uncertainty; (II) a model-driven data collection that analyzes data
limits to predictability, identiﬁes informative data, and guides data investment to enhance predictive
skill, and (III) a data-driven model improvement that analyzes model limits to predictability, identiﬁes
model deﬁciency, and complements missing physics with ML models to advance model development.
2.1 Capability I: A Novel Data-Model Informed Prediction
The proposed prediction framework focuses on leveraging ML techniques to learn a direct relationship
between data variables (in which we have observations including direct measurements of SWS and
indirect streamﬂow) and prediction variables (i.e., SWS at the locations and times of interest), and then
deploys this learned data-prediction relationship (i.e., a ML model) and uses the actual observations
for prediction. In this framework, the role of models is reconsidered in which models are forward-
simulated to generate samples of data variables and prediction variables to establish their relationship
instead of being inversely calibrated to match the observations in the traditional data-assimilation
methods. This new formulation has several beneﬁts. (1) It allows for considering a variety of sources
of uncertainty simultaneously in the forward simulations for improving SWS predictability across a
broad range of geological and climatic settings. (2) It uses observations to directly reduce prediction
uncertainty based on the learned data-prediction relationship without computationally challenging
parameter optimization, which enables efﬁcient prediction and fast data assimilation. (3) It uses
online training for the ensemble forward simulations and ofﬂine learning for assimilating observations.
This strategy can leverage the exascale computing for parallel simulations and the edge computing
for continually updating predictions from the observation streams. A collection of ML techniques
and analysis is proposed to implement this capability, including Bayesian deep neural networks [ 19]
2Figure 1: ML-enabled model-data integration for advancing understanding and predictability of SWS. This
novel framework allows for considering various sources of uncertainty, linking diverse data with model for
prediction improvement and uncertainty reduction, and analyzing the data and model limits to inform the data
and model development by leveraging ML, exascale computing and edge computing.
to learn the data-prediction relationship, surrogate modeling [ 14] to accelerate the forward simulation,
dimension reduction [ 8] and feature detection to extract sample information, and continual learning
to assimilate data streams.
2.2 Capability II: Model-Driven Data Collection
We propose to use feature detection and sensitivity analysis to guide the spatiotemporal data acquisi-
tion. We will ﬁrst use feature detection techniques to identify where SWS is likely to signiﬁcantly
affect hydrologic ﬂuxes and state variables and what types of data and how much information are
missing to improve the prediction. Then, we will conduct a two-way global sensitivity analysis [ 17] to
identify key data variables and locations that can constrain those uncertain parameters and processes
that have a vital impact on predictions. Finally, we will perform a value of information analysis
[20,10] for the cost-effective observational design. These analyses will be performed in the reduced
dimensions of the data and prediction variables. Our new framework makes this dimension reduction
feasible and effective because for SWS prediction, the data variables and prediction variables are
usually time series or spatial maps whose dimensions can be greatly reduced without much loss of
information.
2.3 Capability III: Data-Driven Model Improvement
Model falsiﬁcation and casual analysis will be used to inform the SWS dynamics implementation
in ELMs. We will ﬁrst perform model falsiﬁcation to analyze the consistency between the model
generated data samples and the actual observations. If the data samples are inconsistent with the
observations by showing the observations outside the sample clouds, the models are falsiﬁed, and the
falsiﬁed models cannot make effective prediction in the out-of-observation regime (such as different
geological and climatic settings). Then, we will use causal analysis to explore the underlying variable
interconnection from the data and generate new hypothesis [ 13]. Finally, we will build a data-driven
ML model from the hypothesis generation to compensate the missing SWS dynamics in the ELMs
for a closure simulation in the use of physics-ML hybrid modeling [ 15]. Capability I will inform
Capabilities II and III which will in turn advance Capability I.
3 Impact and Future work
SWS is a key variable of the climate system. It constrains plant transpiration and photosynthesis,
with consequent impacts on the water, energy and biogeochemical cycles. Moreover, it is a storage
3component for precipitation and radiation anomalies, inducing persistence in the climate system.
Finally, it is involved in a number of feedbacks at the local, regional and global scales, and plays a
major role in climate-change projections. This paper proposes a ML-enabled model-data integration
idea to improve the predictability of SWS. We identiﬁed four intensively studied watersheds with
diverse geology and climate — Shale Hills (Pennsylvania), Walker Branch (Tennessee), Elder Creek
(California), and East River (Colorado) — for demonstration of the proposed idea. Diverse data
sources (e.g., streamﬂow, stream chemistry, topography, permeability and porosity, geophysical
images, groundwater table, rooting depth, soil depth, and evapotranspiration, along with ELM
simulation data) at these four sites will provide inputs for the ML analysis. After testing and reﬁning
the techniques on the local scale, we will extend the framework to a continental scale.
References
[1]Hao, Z., Singh, V . P., and Xia, Y . (2018). Seasonal drought prediction: Advances, challenges,
and future prospects. Reviews of Geophysics , 56(1):108–141.
[2]Hartick, C., Furusho-Percot, C., Goergen, K., and Kollet, S. (2021). An interannual probabilistic
assessment of subsurface water storage over europe using a fully coupled terrestrial model. Water
Resources Research , 57(1):e2020WR027828. e2020WR027828 2020WR027828.
[3] Hill, M. C. (2000). Methods and Guidelines for Effective Model Calibration , pages 1–10.
[4]Hirschi, M., Seneviratne, S., and Alexandrov, V . (2011). Observational evidence for soil-moisture
impact on hot extremes in southeastern europe. Nature Geosci. , 4:17–21.
[5]Ireson, A., Wheater, H., Butler, A., Mathias, S., Finch, J., and Cooper, J. (2006). Hydrological
processes in the chalk unsaturated zone – insights from an intensive ﬁeld monitoring programme.
Journal of Hydrology , 330(1):29–43. Hydro-ecological functioning of the Pang and Lambourn
catchments, UK.
[6]Koirala, S., Jung, M., Reichstein, M., de Graaf, I. E. M., Camps-Valls, G., Ichii, K., Papale, D.,
Ráduly, B., Schwalm, C. R., Tramontana, G., and Carvalhais, N. (2017). Global distribution of
groundwater-vegetation spatial covariation. Geophysical Research Letters , 44(9):4134–4142.
[7]Li, P., Zha, Y ., Shi, L., Tso, C.-H. M., Zhang, Y ., and Zeng, W. (2020). Comparison of the use of
a physical-based model with data assimilation and machine learning methods for simulating soil
water dynamics. Journal of Hydrology , 584:124692.
[8]Ma, Y . and Zhu, L. (2013). A review on dimension reduction. International Statistical Review ,
81(1):134–150.
[9]Maxwell, R. M., Chow, F. K., and Kollet, S. J. (2007). The groundwater–land-surface–atmosphere
connection: Soil moisture effects on the atmospheric boundary layer in fully-coupled simulations.
Advances in Water Resources , 30(12):2447–2466.
[10] Neuman, S. P., Xue, L., Ye, M., and Lu, D. (2012). Bayesian analysis of data-worth considering
model and parameter uncertainties. Advances in Water Resources , 36:75–85. Special Issue on
Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation and Risk Assessment.
[11] Ochsner, T. E., Cosh, M. H., Cuenca, R. H., Dorigo, W. A., Draper, C. S., Hagimoto, Y .,
Kerr, Y . H., Larson, K. M., Njoku, E. G., Small, E. E., and Zreda, M. (2013). State of the art in
large-scale soil moisture monitoring. Soil Science Society of America Journal , 77(6):1888–1919.
[12] Paniconi, C., Troch, P. A., van Loon, E. E., and Hilberts, A. G. J. (2003). Hillslope-storage
boussinesq model for subsurface ﬂow and variable source areas along complex hillslopes: 2.
intercomparison with a three-dimensional richards equation model. Water Resources Research ,
39(11).
[13] Pearl, J. (2010). An introduction to causal inference. The international journal of biostatistics ,
6(1).
[14] Razavi, S., Tolson, B. A., and Burn, D. H. (2012). Review of surrogate modeling in water
resources. Water Resources Research , 48(7).
4[15] Reichstein, M., Camps-Valls, G., Stevens, B., Jung, M., Denzler, J., and Carvalhais, N.
(2019). Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven earth system science. Na-
ture, 566:195–204.
[16] Sahoo, S., Sahoo, B., and Panda, S. N. (2018). Hillslope-storage boussinesq model for simulating
subsurface water storage dynamics in scantily-gauged catchments. Advances in Water Resources ,
121:219–234.
[17] Saltelli, A. (2002). Sensitivity analysis for importance assessment. Risk Analysis , 22(3):579–
590.
[18] Seneviratne, S. I., Corti, T., Davin, E. L., Hirschi, M., Jaeger, E. B., Lehner, I., Orlowsky, B.,
and Teuling, A. J. (2010). Investigating soil moisture–climate interactions in a changing climate:
A review. Earth-Science Reviews , 99(3):125–161.
[19] Wang, H. and Yeung, D.-Y . (2016). Towards bayesian deep learning: A framework and some
existing methods. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 28(12):3395–3408.
[20] Wang, Y ., Shi, L., Lin, L., Holzman, M., Carmona, F., and Zhang, Q. (2020). A robust data-
worth analysis framework for soil moisture ﬂow by hybridizing sequential data assimilation and
machine learning. Vadose Zone Journal , 19(1):e20026.
5