Analyzing Micro-Level Rebound Effects of Energy
Efficient Technologies
Mayank Jain∗
School of Computer Science
University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
mayank.jain1@ucdconnect.ieMukta Jain∗
Delhi School of Economics
University of Delhi
Delhi, India
muktajain@econdse.org
Tarek AlSkaif
Information Technology Group
Wageningen University and Research
The Netherlands
tarek.alskaif@wur.nlSoumyabrata Dev†
The ADAPT SFI Research Centre
University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
soumyabrata.dev@ucd.ie
Abstract
Energy preservation is central to prevent resource depletion, climate change and
environment degradation. Investment in raising efficiency of appliances is among
the most significant attempts to save energy. Ironically, introduction of many
such energy saving appliances increased the total energy consumption instead of
reducing it. This effect in literature is attributed to the inherent Jevons paradox
(JP) and optimism bias (OB) in consumer behavior. However, the magnitude of
these instincts vary among different people. Identification of this magnitude for
each household can enable the development of appropriate policies that induce
desired energy saving behaviour. Using the RECS 2015 dataset, the paper uses
machine learning for each electrical appliance to determine the dependence of
their total energy consumption on their energy star rating. This shows that only
substitutable appliances register increase in energy demand upon boosted efficiency.
Lastly, an index is noted to indicate the varying influence of JP and OB on different
households.
1 Introduction
Climate change is one of the greatest environmental challenge in today’s era. Increasing amount of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is among the crucial factors for this deterioration [ 1]. According
to a 2021 report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [ 2], there has been a
significant rise in the concentration of GHG emissions since the pre-industrial period. Increased
usage of energy, even in the form of electrical energy, has been one of the most contributing factors
for the rise in GHG concentrations in the atmosphere [ 3]. Consequently, a vast amount of research
has been conducted to engineer energy efficient technologies and consumer goods [4].
However, time and again, previous literature has shown a rebound effect of introducing energy
efficient technologies. This effect is much more significant at the level of end consumers of such
technologies. Herring and Roy [ 5] have shown that technological advancements modify the lifestyle
and attitude of people. They further state that even if the product in itself consumes less energy per
∗Authors Contributed Equally
†Corresponding Author
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2022.unit time, an increased usage of it by the consumers nullifies/reduces the benefits. This is in coherence
with the well-known Jevons paradox (JP), formulated by Stanley Jevons in 1865 [6]. It diminishes
the expected benefit from the newer technology. Apart from JP, human psychology also plays a
crucial role in defining their behavior/response to any change. Several researchers in the domain have
claimed that people possess optimism bias (OB) [ 7,8]. It is a tendency of humans to underestimate
negative events for themselves or from their actions. This raises a possibility that post adoption of
energy efficient appliance, consumers might start to further underestimate the environmental impact
of consuming the appliance and thereby increasing their demand for electrical energy.
In short, it is deemed that people consume limited electrical energy primarily because of two main
factors, namely, 1) monetary cost of electricity, and 2) environmental impact. Since the adoption of
energy efficient technologies is expected to reduce both of these factors, electricity demand might
increase corresponding to the effects of JP and OB, respectively. This intuition is validated at a
macro-level in previous studies. Greening et al. [9] consolidated the results from previous research to
identify the behavioural influences upon introduction of appliances with higher energy efficiency. The
results showed a net increase in the electricity demand. In another national level study, Frondel [ 10]
showed that the introduction of a more efficient technology influence the behavior of consumers for
worse. More recently, Li et al. [11] showed that without proper policies, technological progress does
not reduce energy consumption. Focusing on regional data, they further identified significant spatial
variations in the rebound effects. Thereby further strengthening the requirement of more micro level
analysis of rebound effects to identify the exact variations of JP and OB at the level of individual
households and for different technologies.
Every individual (or household) is different in terms of their lifestyle, level of education, and concern
for environment. Thus, to make direct and concrete claims about the influence of JP and OB on their
energy consumption patterns, we need to analyze the consumption patterns of each individual for
both non-energy efficient technologies and energy efficient technologies in otherwise similar, yet
parallel, universes. Since such data is not yet available, we need alternate measures to estimate the
influence of JP and OB on consumer behaviour.
Using a dataset of total energy consumption of different appliances, their energy efficiency ratings,
and household characteristics, this paper uses machine learning to identify the appliances where
rebound effects can be observed in the community as a whole. Additionally, an index is noted to
estimate the varying influence of JP and OB on individual households.
2 Dataset and Pre-Processing
The data was obtained from the 14thiteration of the residential energy consumption survey (RECS)
program, 2015 [ 12]. The survey was conducted by the Independent Statistics & Analysis group,
U.S. Energy Information Administration. More specifically, this study uses the publicly available
‘microdata’ which consists of data from more than 5600 randomly sampled households. The dataset
provides features for both appliance level data and the data on household characteristics as follows:
• census 2010 urban type - rural/urban
• whether the house is owned or rented
• total number of rooms in the house
• level of insulation in the house
• if on-site solar electricity is generated
• electricity payment by self or landlord
• number of household members
• number of days someone is at home• annual gross household income
• energy assistance scheme participation
• climate zone of the household
• household race
• highest level of education
• employment status of respondent
• age of respondent
From the appliance level data, the total energy consumption of each appliance (say, i) inkWh
(KWHi), and a binary flag describing whether the appliance is energy star qualified or not ( ESQi),
are considered in this paper. Since the study is to be conducted separately for each appliance i, to
compare the impact of ESQ across the appliances, the readings of KWHiwere scaled down to
[0,1]using min-max normalization:
nKWHi=KWHi−min(KWHi)
max(KWHi)−min(KWHi);∀i. (1)
2During pre-processing, all households for which the information for these features was not suffi-
cient/known were removed. However, the omission is done separately for each appliance’s case such
that the lack of information/availability of just one appliance in a household’s case will not affect its
eligibility to be considered in the analysis of another appliance. This means that for each appliance,
we obtain different number of households that can be considered. Following is the list of appliances
that were considered in this study along with the number of households (hh) that remain eligible
against each appliance.
• Clothes Dryer (CD) −4,101hh
• Clothes Washer (CW) −4,172hh
• Dish Washer (DW) −3,501hh
• Freezer (FZ) −1,700hh• Refrigerator (RF) −4,717hh
• Light Bulbs (LB) −4,738hh
• Water Heater (WH) −4,724hh
3 Methodology
The study aims at visualizing behavioral shifts in consumers when they use an energy efficient
technology. To proxy the behavioral response, this study analyzes how people use energy efficient
appliances. As an indicative test, the study models the appliances-wise energy consumption over the
energy efficiency of those appliances. If JP and OB indeed exist among individual energy consumers,
the following hypothesis should be valid:
Hypothesis H0.Consumers using an energy efficient appliance will consume more power than their
counterparts.
Since the coefficients of a linear regression model can be easily interpreted, as compared with the
parameters of other complex machine learning models, linear regression was chosen as the optimal
machine learning model for this study. Consequently, a series of multi-variate linear regressions
are performed by considering the nKWHias independent variable, ESQias dependent variable
and the rest of the defined 15household characteristic variables (say, hhCh n,∀n∈ {1, . . . , 15}) as
controls. For each appliance i, the equation for linear regression can be written as:
nKWHi=αi·ESQi+15X
n=1βi
n·hhCh n+γi. (2)
While the data pre-processing (and results post-processing) was done in python , the regression
analysis was performed in Stata3. Once the coefficients ( α, βn,andγ) are estimated, the impact of
ESQ overKWH is determined from the model as∂nKWHi
∂ESQi=αi.
Note that ESQiis1for an energy star qualified (or an energy efficient) appliance and 0otherwise;
andnKWHiis a direct representative of energy consumption of the appliance i. Hence, a positive
value of αiwill validate the initial hypothesis H0whereas a negative value of αiwill invalidate H0.
Lastly, obtained values of αiwere validated using t-test [ 13] for significance. Absolute value of the
t-statistic must be greater than 1.96for the αito be considered significant.
4 Results and Discussion
The coefficients of ESQ for each appliance is shown in the figure 1, along with their 95% confidence
intervals and the value of t-statistic. While 2appliances, i.e. CD and DW, validate the initial
hypothesis H0,3others, namely, CW, RF, and LB, do not. Since the results for WH and FZ are
statistically insignificant, they will not be involved in the discussion.
It should be noted here that the 2appliances which validate H0are all substitutable appliances. In
consumer theory, a substitutable product/service is defined as the one which can be replaced by
another means [ 14, pp. 108]. Previous research has shown that people don’t mind cleaning dishes by
hand and hence DW could be considered as substitutable [ 15,16]. Similarly, for CD, people tend to
use it for partial drying instead of full/complete dry [ 17]. On the other hand, the 3appliances which
3With the spirit of reproducible research the python and Stata scripts used to conduct
the experiments in this study can be accessed at: https://github.com/jain15mayank/
Behavioural-Study-Indicative-Tests
3CD CW DW FZ RF LB WH
Appliances−102−101−1000100101102Coeﬃcient of ESQ ( α)3.45
10.036.68 0.10
9.487.271.82nKWH dependence on ESQ for diﬀerent appliances
Estimated Value
95% Conﬁdence IntervalFigure 1: Plot showing normalized KWH de-
pendence on ESQ for different appliances. Esti-
mated value of the dependence parameter ( α)),
its95% confidence interval and the absolute
value of t-statistic are reported for each appli-
ance. If α >0, appliance consumes more elec-
tricity in general when it is energy star qualified.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Ratio of KWH consumption of CD vs. CW02004006008001000Number of HouseholdsFreqency Distribution of Households w.r.t. CD/CW
ESQ=0
ESQ=1Figure 2: Frequency distribution of households
that have both CD and CW, with respect to
KWH CD/KWH CW. Blue bars: set of households
whose both CD and CW are not energy efficient
(ESQ = 0); Orange bars: set of households
whose both CD and CW are energy efficient
(ESQ = 1).
invalidate the H0are all non-substitutable appliances. RF normally runs 24×7in a typical household,
whereas most households in the west tend to use CW to wash their clothes. Also, CW generally has
a fixed cleansing cycle for particular load/type of clothes. Operating times of LB depends on the
individual habits and don’t have practical substitutes.
Because people are not biased for non-substitutable appliances, they always consume them in fixed
proportions irrespective of their energy efficiency rating. Hence, the operating hours of the appliances
remain similar, and adopting an energy efficient alternative helps reduce the energy consumption
as expected. Whereas, for the substitutable appliances, users tend to overuse them, if they have an
energy efficient one, to reduce their manual labor.
The RECS 2015 also provides the information on usage frequency (number of times) for the ap-
pliances. It showed similar frequency trends for both CD and CW across the dataset. Hence, it is
safe to assume that both CD and CW are mostly used together. Yet, the difference comes due to
the variation in the degree of drying capacity in the case of CD. Because of this complementary use
nature of CD and CW, the ratio of their energy consumption (i.e.KWH CD/KWH CW) for a particular
household represents the knowledge about costs and benefits of altering the CD’s drying capacity.
The other subjective factors like household lifestyle, number of members in household, income, etc.
get cancelled out.
Accordingly, figure 2 shows the frequency distribution of households with respect to the ratio
KWH CD/KWH CW. Only households which have both CD and CW installed in their homes are
considered. The set of households with both CD and CW as non-energy efficient (i.e. ESQ = 0),
sayS0, are represented in blue color. Whereas the set of households with both CD and CW as energy
efficient (i.e. ESQ = 1), say S1, are represented in orange color. The figure clearly shows that the
distribution of S0is heavily skewed towards the left as compared to that of the S1, which is bimodal.
The households either don’t use CD at all, but whenever they use it, households with greater energy
efficient CD makes full use of it, while those with non energy efficient CD dry their cloths only lightly.
Therefore, an increased value ofKWH CD/KWH CWfor most households in S1clearly reflects that
they are acting under the influence of JP and OB. Hence, this ratio, subject to validation on datasets
from other regions, might be used as an index to measure the influence of JP and OB on consumer
behaviour on an individual household. A higher value of this index indicates higher influence.
5 Conclusion
While the previous literature shows the existence of rebound effects of energy efficient technologies
at a macro scale, this work performs micro level analysis to identify the reason behind individual
consumer responses upon increasing efficiency of any appliance. The paper makes use of the machine
learning algorithm to draw its inferences. Consequently, the paper identifies that the degree of rebound
effect varies across the individuals and can only be seen in appliances which are substitutable. Finally,
the paper proposes an index to estimate the influence of the behavioral shifts, i.e. Jevons paradox
4(JP) and optimism bias (OB), for each individual household. A machine learning model can further
be used to learn and identify the people who have such behavioral biases based on regular survey
information depicting household characteristics. Focused policy interventions can be targeted, if such
identification is carried out. For instance, the environmental consequences and billing information
must be carefully publicised for substitutable appliances; and the educational campaigns must be
precisely targeted for the subset of population which is likely to be influenced more with JP and OB.
References
[1]R. Cassia, M. Nocioni, N. Correa-Aragunde, and L. Lamattina, “Climate change and the impact
of greenhouse gasses: Co2 and no, friends and foes of plant oxidative stress,” Frontiers in plant
science , vol. 9, p. 273, 2018.
[2]V . Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y . Chen,
L. Goldfarb, M. Gomis et al. , “Climate change 2021: the physical science basis,” 2021 Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change , 2021.
[3]B. Girod, D. P. van Vuuren, and E. G. Hertwich, “Climate policy through changing consumption
choices: Options and obstacles for reducing greenhouse gas emissions,” Global Environmental
Change , vol. 25, pp. 5–15, 2014.
[4]P. Christensen, P. Francisco, E. Myers, H. Shao, and M. Souza, “Energy efficiency can
deliver for climate policy: Evidence from machine learning-based targeting,” National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 30467, September 2022. [Online]. Available:
"http://www.nber.org/papers/w30467"
[5]H. Herring and R. Roy, “Technological innovation, energy efficient design and the rebound
effect,” Technovation , vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 194–203, 2007.
[6] B. Alcott, “Jevons’ paradox,” Ecological economics , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 9–21, 2005.
[7]H. G. Seaward and S. Kemp, “Optimism bias and student debt,” New Zealand Journal of
Psychology , vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 17–19, 2000.
[8]J. Hatfield and R. S. Job, “Optimism bias about environmental degradation: The role of the
range of impact of precautions,” Journal of environmental Psychology , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 17–30,
2001.
[9]L. A. Greening, D. L. Greene, and C. Difiglio, “Energy efficiency and consumption—the
rebound effect—a survey,” Energy policy , vol. 28, no. 6-7, pp. 389–401, 2000.
[10] M. Frondel, “Energy conservation, the rebound effect, and future energy and transport technolo-
gies: an introduction to energy conservation and the rebound effect,” International Journal of
Energy Technology and Policy , vol. 2, no. 3, 2004.
[11] G. Li, J. Sun, and Z. Wang, “Exploring the energy consumption rebound effect of industrial
enterprises in the beijing–tianjin–hebei region,” Energy Efficiency , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1007–1026,
2019.
[12] “Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS) - 2015 Data,” U.S. Energy Information
Administration (EIA), Dec 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.eia.gov/consumption/
residential/data/2015/index.php?view=microdata
[13] E. Whitley and J. Ball, “Statistics review 5: Comparison of means,” Critical Care , vol. 6, no. 5,
p. 424, Jul 2002. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1186/cc1548
[14] H. R. Varian, Intermediate microeconomics: a modern approach: ninth international student
edition . WW Norton & Company, 2014.
[15] P. Berkholz, R. Stamminger, G. Wnuk, J. Owens, and S. Bernarde, “Manual dishwashing habits:
an empirical analysis of uk consumers,” International journal of consumer studies , vol. 34,
no. 2, pp. 235–242, 2010.
[16] R. Stamminger, A. Schmitz, and I. Hook, “Why consumers in europe do not use energy efficient
automatic dishwashers to clean their dishes?” Energy efficiency , vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 567–583,
2019.
[17] Y . Yamaguchi, E. Seii, M. Itagaki, and M. Nagayama, “Evaluation of domestic washing in japan
using life cycle assessment (lca),” International journal of consumer studies , vol. 35, no. 2, pp.
243–253, 2011.
5