Understanding Climate Legislation Decisions with
Machine Learning
Jeffrey N. Clark
University of Bristol, UK
jeff.clark@bristol.ac.ukMichelle W.L. Wan
University of Bristol, UK
michelle.wan@bristol.ac.uk
Raúl Santos-Rodríguez
University of Bristol, UK
enrsr@bristol.ac.uk
Abstract
Effective action is crucial in order to avert climate disaster. Key in enacting change
is the swift adoption of climate positive legislation which advocates for climate
change mitigation and adaptation. This is because government legislation can result
in far-reaching impact, due to the relationships between climate policy, technology,
and market forces. To advocate for legislation, current strategies aim to identify
potential levers and obstacles, presenting an opportunity for the application of
recent advances in machine learning language models. Here we propose a machine
learning pipeline to analyse climate legislation, aiming to investigate the feasibility
of natural language processing for the classification of climate legislation texts,
to predict policy voting outcomes. By providing a model of the decision making
process, the proposed pipeline can enhance transparency and aid policy advocates
and decision makers in understanding legislative decisions, thereby providing a tool
to monitor and understand legislative decisions towards climate positive impact.
1 Introduction
Legislation is a key lever in fighting climate change. While climate policies lay out a plan of action,
climate legislation is enforceable law. Legislation therefore has the potential to both help and hinder
climate-positive progress, impacting societal change, public infrastructure, and industry.
Despite recent commitments, current climate change mitigation efforts remain insufficient [ 11].
Existing solutions to fight climate change include low-carbon energy generation, tightening emissions
regulations, limiting the destruction of carbon sequestering environments, and reducing agricultural
emissions; these could halve global emissions, yet remain largely underutilised [ 12]. In large part,
this is an issue of political will and legislative implementation [5]. However, history has shown that
national efforts can be rapidly mobilised, such as during World War II, or the COVID-19 pandemic.
Political decisions could therefore also rapidly utilise these existing solutions, and accelerate the
development and deployment of new technologies, to fight climate change.
Improved transparency around legislative decisions can aid decision makers in progress towards
climate change mitigation and adaptation. To this end, policy advocates already attempt to keep
track of policy approvals and their driving factors. However, understanding and predicting legislative
decisions is highly complex. Machine learning offers techniques towards achieving this, through
analysis, modelling, and explaining these decisions.
Recent advances in machine learning have enabled the development of sophisticated tools to help
tackle climate change [ 14], in domains from urban planning [ 10] to precision agriculture [ 9]. Of
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2023.(a) Create dataset of previously proposed legisla2on:•Documenta2on1,2,3•Poli2cian vo2ng records and outcomeAccompanying contextual text, e.g.:•Debate transcripts4•News ar2cles•Public consulta2on results•Social media postsParliamentary contextual features, e.g.:•Parliamentary composi2on•Time to next elec2on(b) Preprocessing:•Cleaning and summarisa2on of text to appropriate token length•Generate addi2onal features, e.g. climate sen2ment(c) Predict vo1ng outcome:Fine tune pre-trained ClimateBERT LLM model for legisla2on classiﬁca2on(d) Apply explainability techniques:Aid human interpretability of model outputs, e.g. counterfactuals and feature importance
Figure 1: Proposed pipeline. LLM = Large language model.
particular relevance here, natural language processing (NLP) aims to enable machines to understand,
process and generate human language. Increased computing power, coupled with transformer-based
architectures, have enabled recent large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4, PaLM 2, and
LLaMA, to demonstrate unprecedented performance. Climate change-related applications of NLP
have included understanding the effects of temperature on hate speech [ 17], and efforts are now
emerging to utilise NLP specifically around climate legislation and policy, including: automatic
summarisation [ 22], tracking national changes [ 3], automated policy evaluation [ 1], monitoring public
discussion [ 7], classification of Paris Agreement Climate Action Plans [ 4], informing policy relating
to climate justice [6], and integrating climate change adaptation policy [2].
In this contribution we propose a pipeline utilising NLP to better understand climate legislation
decisions. We aim to investigate the feasibility of NLP for the classification of voting outcomes
on proposed legislation. Applying established explainability techniques to the trained classifier can
then aid understanding of the model and therefore provide insight into the driving factors of voting
decisions themselves. The findings from implementing the pipeline could aid policy experts in
legislation advocacy, while improving transparency, accountability, and community engagement;
thereby empowering efforts towards climate change mitigation and adaptation.
2 Proposed methods
The proposed approach is comprised of four components:
Create a dataset (Figure 1a). Historically proposed climate legislation and associated parliamentary
votes, such as are available online for the UK12and European Parliaments3. Accompanying texts
are collected for climate sentiment and topic analysis. To enhance trustworthiness and reduce bias
impacts, these should encompass a range of sources, including: parliamentary debate transcripts (e.g.
Hansard4), news outlet articles, public consultation results, and social media posts. Utilising elements
of computational argumentation [ 18], could enhance understanding of opinions and climate stances,
with greater speed and scalability than current manual forms of gathering opinion data. Features
relevant to parliamentary context will be included, such as legislation proposers, upcoming election
time frames, and the size of the potential majority in government, which is particularly relevant when
whips anticipate voting along party lines.
Summarise the collected text (Figure 1b). Climate legislation documents are extensive, of greater
length than many LLMs allow. Summarisation reduces token length [ 13] and enables input to an LLM,
using extractive and hybrid architectures for text summarisation [ 20]. Additionally, summarisation
1https://bills.parliament.uk
2https://votes.parliament.uk/V otes/Commons
3https://www.europarl.europa.eu/plenary/en/home.html
4https://hansard.parliament.uk
2distills the key ideas of legislation texts, by filtering out unwanted noise associated with specific
wording and retaining useful signals associated with document content.
Train a classifier (Figure 1c). To predict the voting outcomes for legislation, an LLM pre-trained
for climate tasks (e.g. ClimateBERT [ 19], or CliMedBERT [ 8]), is applied after fine tuning. Outcomes
are assigned appropriate labels led by experts, such as pass/fail/on hold. LLMs have been shown to
perform well for both binary and multiclass classification when trained with suitable legal domain-
specific features [ 16]. Human expertise will be incorporated through feedback to compliment the
automated approach.
Apply interpretability and explainability techniques (Figure 1d). Established techniques for
NLP can highlight important elements of the summarised text, determine feature importance for
accompanying variables such as public opinion or the size of government majority, and identify
counterfactuals which may aid humans in the drafting stage of proposals [ 21]. Results of explainability
analyses may also provide insight into trends in historical climate legislation, by identifying patterns
within voting outcomes, thereby aiding transparency and providing insights for the general public.
3 Responsible AI and risks
Responsible implementation of the proposed pipeline must address:
Potential misuse by bad actors We propose methods to improve understanding of the legislation
approval process. Although intended for climate positive purposes, implementation could aid actors
with opposing intentions. While this is an inherent risk for existing tools used by policy advocates,
AI tools evolve rapidly, often overtaking regulation. Deployment here must therefore prioritise robust
ML approaches which are explainable and human-centric. An explainable open-source pipeline can
thus aid transparency, building social trust in leglislative decision making processes.
Incomplete representations of legislative process Documentation and public debates cannot
capture the full spectrum of true opinions and intentions of voting politicians. The classifier therefore
receives an incomplete picture of the legislative process, in turn affecting performance. Inclusion of
the amendments process and gradual adaptation of policies may useful provide insights [15].
Dynamic political environments Political environments and public opinion are dynamic, affecting
the accuracy and validity of classifications. To mitigate inaccuracies during a change in power, models
can include voting records and parliamentary composition. Furthermore, the pipeline uses readily
available data sources which can be processed automatically, narrowing the inaccuracy window.
4 Expected outputs and beneficiaries
Following development and implementation of the proposed pipeline we intend to publish our
findings, and make the code openly available. Legislation is a central factor in environmental progress,
ultimately driving the global approach and trajectory for humanity’s response to climate change.
Improving our understanding of climate legislation decisions could enable improved engagement
with the legislative process. By improving transparency and understanding of these decisions, we can
build social trust. Furthermore, by analysing policies within the context of social media posts, public
consultation transcripts, and news articles, we can additionally gain a better understanding of public
sentiment and opinion, which in turn can shape advocacy campaigns by more effectively utilising
public support as a policy lever. The pipeline can assist policy experts with advocacy by building an
understanding of the characteristics which drive the acceptance of a particular proposal, enabling
informed iteration on their proposed legislation to improve chances of adoption. With this in mind,
the proposed pipeline seeks to assist lawmakers, and wider society, in work towards cross-sectoral
climate mitigation and adaptation, to drive climate positive impact.
3Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We appreciate the support and insights provided by Fatma Tarlaci as part of the Climate Change AI
Mentorship Programme. Thank you to Edwin Simpson, Chelcie Henry-Robertson, Robert Greally,
and Vaclav Janecek for fruitful discussions of the proposed approach. Funding was provided by a
UKRI Turing AI Fellowship [grant number EP/V024817/1].
References
[1]J. Aitken. Ai-based text analysis for evaluating food waste policies. In AAAI 2022 Fall
Symposium: The Role of AI in Responding to Climate Challenges , 2022. URL https://www.
climatechange.ai/papers/aaaifss2022/1 .
[2]R. Biesbroek, S. Badloe, and I. N. Athanasiadis. Machine learning for research on climate
change adaptation policy integration: an exploratory uk case study. Regional Environmental
Change , 20(3):85, 2020.
[3]F. N. Cação, A. H. Reali Costa, N. Unterstell, L. Yonaha, T. Stec, and F. Ishisaki. Deeppolicy-
tracker: Tracking changes in environmental policy in the brazilian federal official gazette with
deep learning. In ICML 2021 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning ,
2021. URL https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/icml2021/35 .
[4]T. Corringham, D. Spokoyny, E. Xiao, C. Cha, C. Lemarchand, M. Syal, E. Olson, and
A. Gershunov. Bert classification of paris agreement climate action plans. In ICML 2021
Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning , 2021. URL https://www.
climatechange.ai/papers/icml2021/45 .
[5]A. Gore. Al gore at davos 2023, "we have the tech to slow climate change – so where’s political
will", Jan 2023. URL https://tinyurl.com/vbjn63eh .
[6]L. Hampton. Machine learning informed policy for environmental justice in atlanta with climate
justice implications. In NeurIPS 2020 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine
Learning , 2020. URL https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/neurips2020/88 .
[7]V . Hätönen and F. Melzer. From talk to action with accountability: Monitoring the public
discussion of policy makers with deep neural networks and topic modelling. In ICML 2021
Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning , 2021. URL https://www.
climatechange.ai/papers/icml2021/75 .
[8]B. Jalalzadeh Fard, S. A. Hasan, and J. E. Bell. Climedbert: A pre-trained language model for
climate and health-related text. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with
Machine Learning , 2022. URL https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/neurips2022/
110.
[9]K. G. Liakos, P. Busato, D. Moshou, S. Pearson, and D. Bochtis. Machine learning in agriculture:
A review. Sensors , 18(8):2674, 2018.
[10] N. Milojevic-Dupont and F. Creutzig. Machine learning for geographically differentiated
climate change mitigation in urban areas. Sustainable Cities and Society , 64:102526, 2021.
[11] H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, H. Adams, C. Adler, P. Aldunce, E. Ali, R. A. Begum, R. Betts,
R. B. Kerr, R. Biesbroek, et al. Climate change 2022: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability .
IPCC Geneva, Switzerland:, 2022.
[12] H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, M. Tignor, A. Alegría, M. Craig,
S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V . Möller, et al. IPCC, 2022: Summary for policymakers . Cambridge
University Press, 2022.
[13] K. Rathi, Y . V . Singh, and S. Raj. A review of state-of-the-art automatic text summarisation.
International Journal of Creative Research Thoughts (2022) , 10(4), 2022.
4[14] D. Rolnick, P. L. Donti, L. H. Kaack, K. Kochanski, A. Lacoste, K. Sankaran, A. S. Ross,
N. Milojevic-Dupont, N. Jaques, A. Waldman-Brown, et al. Tackling climate change with
machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 55(2):1–96, 2022.
[15] M. Russell and D. Gover. Legislation at Westminster: Parliamentary actors and influence in the
making of British law . Oxford University Press, 2017.
[16] D. Song, S. Gao, B. He, and F. Schilder. On the effectiveness of pre-trained language models for
legal natural language processing: An empirical study. IEEE Access , 10:75835–75858, 2022.
[17] A. Stechemesser, A. Levermann, and L. Wenz. Temperature impacts on hate speech online:
evidence from four billion tweets. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with
Machine Learning , 2022. URL https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/neurips2022/
41.
[18] F. Toni. A tutorial on assumption-based argumentation. Argument & Computation , 5(1):89–117,
2014.
[19] N. Webersinke, M. Kraus, J. A. Bingler, and M. Leippold. Climatebert: A pretrained language
model for climate-related text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.12010 , 2021.
[20] F. Zaman, M. Shardlow, S.-U. Hassan, N. R. Aljohani, and R. Nawaz. Htss: A novel hybrid text
summarisation and simplification architecture. Information Processing & Management , 57(6):
102351, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102351.
[21] J. E. Zini and M. Awad. On the explainability of natural language processing deep models.
ACM Computing Surveys , 55(5):1–31, 2022.
[22] A.˙Zółkowski, M. Krzyzi ´nski, P. Wilczy ´nski, S. Gizi ´nski, E. Wi ´snios, B. Pieli ´nski,
J. Sienkiewicz, and P. Biecek. Climate policy tracker: Pipeline for automated analysis of
public climate policies. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine
Learning , 2022. URL https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/neurips2022/59 .
5