Machine Learning towards a Global Parameterisation
of Atmospheric New Particle Formation and Growth
Theodoros Christoudias
christoudias@cyi.ac.cy
Climate and Atmosphere Research Center
The Cyprus Institute
Nicosia, CyprusMihalis A. Nicolaou
m.nicolaou@cyi.ac.cy
Computation-based Science and
Technology Research Center
The Cyprus Institute
Nicosia, Cyprus
Abstract
New particle formation (NPF) and growth in the atmosphere affects climate,
weather, air quality, and human health. It is the ﬁrst step of the complex pro-
cess leading to cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) formation. Even though there is
a wealth of observations from ﬁeld measurements (in forests, high-altitude, polar
regions, coastal and urban sites, aircraft campaigns), as well as laboratory studies
of multi-component nucleation (including the CLOUD chamber at CERN), and
improved nucleation theories, the NPF parameterisations in regional and global
models are lacking. These deﬁciencies make the impacts of aerosols one of the
highest sources of uncertainty in global climate change modelling, and associated
impacts on weather and human health. We propose to use Machine Learning
methods to overcome the challenges in modelling aerosol nucleation and growth,
by ingesting the data from the multitude of available sources to create a single
parameterisation applicable throughout the modelled atmosphere (troposphere
and stratosphere at all latitudes) that efﬁciently encompasses all input ambient
conditions and concentrations of relevant species.
1 Introduction
Clouds and aerosols continue to contribute the largest uncertainty to estimates and interpretations
of the Earth’s changing energy budget [ 26]. Atmospheric aerosols have direct and indirect effects
on Earth’s climate and impacts on public health [ 10]. Aerosols originate from several natural and
anthropogenic sources. New particle formation (NPF), the gas-to-particle conversion of atmospheric
vapours, is a major source of secondary aerosols that can act as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) and
further affect the climate [ 25]. NPF has been observed in boreal forests, coastal, agricultural, and
urban areas, including polluted megacities [ 16,17,15,6]. NPF in the atmosphere profoundly affects
climate, weather, air quality, and human health. It is the ﬁrst step of the complex process leading
to cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) formation. It is estimated that about 40–70% of CCN globally
originate from NPF [20, 30].
Even though there is a wealth of observations from ﬁeld measurements (in forests, high-altitude,
polar regions, coastal and urban sites, aircraft campaigns) [ 2,9,1,3], as well as laboratory studies of
multi-component nucleation (including the CLOUD chamber at CERN) [ 11,12,19], and improved
nucleation theories, there is still limited understanding and the NPF parameterisations in regional and
global models of the atmosphere are lacking. These deﬁciencies make the impacts of aerosols the
highest source of uncertainty in modelling global climate change (IPCC), and associated impacts
on weather and human health. Understanding NPF is imperative to reduce uncertainties in climate
projections and to tackle urban air quality problems.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.In large-scale models of the atmosphere, which consider aerosol dynamics to project climate change, it
is necessary to use parameterised nucleation rates for computational efﬁciency. Presently, atmospheric
models rely on simple parameterisations that are typically polynomial ﬁts to the dependency of
measured NPF rates as a function of vapour concentration (and airborne ions) and are only valid
for the environments and conditions that match each observation site [ 4]. To date, measurements
contribute to disparate parameterisations with limited spatial applicability, even though they relate
to the same physical processes. More detailed theoretical models including additional species
(e.g. nano-Köhler theory [ 14]) were also shown to have limitations and are too computationally
expensive to be incorporated into high-resolution models of the atmosphere and climate. A consistent
parameterisation in the scope of atmospheric modelling, with predictive capacity and computational
efﬁciency, has so far proven to be elusive. The introduction of machine learning methods in this
ﬁeld is limited to using random forest regression of atmospheric model data to a-posteriori derive
measured CCN [ 22], and automating the manual process of observed event identiﬁcation based only
on particle size distributions [8], with no inference or additional insights.
We propose to instead use state-of-the-art data science methods to combine all available measure-
ments of NPF and growth, and associated (vapour concentrations, presence of ions, meteorological
conditions) from the multitide of souces (Sec. 2) into a single hyper-parameter model that can provide
consistent (at all altitudes and environments/latitudes) and efﬁcient (once trained, the computational
load of inference permits to be incorporated in GCMs) NPF simulation. Machine Learning methods
can overcome the challenges in simulating aerosol nucleation and growth by ingesting the data
from the multitude of available sources to create a single parameterisation applicable throughout the
atmosphere (troposphere and stratosphere) that efﬁciently encompasses all ambient conditions and
concentrations of relevant species. At the same time, we can gain insight into the physical processes
undeprinning NPF and growth and the complex interaction of the different components. Such insights
can drive further research, e.g., by guiding future observation campaigns.
2 Data Aggregation
Measurement campaigns of NPF and growth collocated with ambient conditions measurements in-
clude in situ ground station, tower, and aircraft observations. Additional multi-component nucleation
measurement data are available from chamber experiments: (i)In situ condensation particle counters
(CPCs) for 22 ground station locations from the EBAS [ 28] database over the years 1972–2009. (ii)
IAGOS CARIBIC detailed and extensive measurements during long distance ﬂights deploying a mod-
iﬁed airfreight container with automated scientiﬁc apparatus. Using a passenger Airbus A340-600
from Lufthansa in total more than 550 ﬂights are succesfully completed. (iii)The NASA Atmospheric
Tomography Missions (ATom) deploying an extensive gas and aerosol payload on the NASA DC-8
aircraft for systematic, global-scale sampling of the atmosphere, proﬁling continuously from 0.2
to 12 km altitude in all 4 seasons over a 4-year period. (iv)The Aerosol, Cloud, Precipitation, and
Radiation Interactions and Dynamics of Convective Cloud Systems (ACRIDICON) dataset by the
DLR High Altitude and Long Range Aircraft (HALO). (v)Chamber measurements, in particular the
CERN CLOUD experiment.
3 Machine Learning Application
In the following, we propose two pathways for globally analysing the disparate sources of data
described in Sec. 2. While not necessarily disjoint, the ﬁrst is focused on obtaining accurate models
that can be integrated in general circulation models (GCMs) in a black-box fashion, facilitating future
climate predictions and reducing uncertainty. In contrast, the second is oriented towards discovering
insights of the underlying physical process that can drive future observation campaigns and enhance
the understanding of the process by domain experts.
Global Parameterisation for NPF from ambient conditions and species concentrations. Current
approaches result in disparate NPF parameterisations with speciﬁc applicability in terms of initial
conditions [ 4]. In contrast, we propose the adoption of machine learning approaches to create a
hyperparametrization of new particle formation and growth applicable throughout the atmosphere
(from lower troposphere to higher levels of the stratosphere), that is accurate outside the current
limits of the input data span of current parametrizations. The speedy test-time evaluation of machine
learning models can lead to computationally efﬁcient techniques that can be readily integrated in
2GCMs for multi-decadal simulations. To do so, data will be ingested from multiple data sources (Sec.
2), with each source covering speciﬁc portions of the problem phase space, whilst describing the
same underlying physical process.
The above problem can be considered in the context of supervised learning, for example by con-
sidering a classiﬁcation problem with NPF being a binary target variable, or a regression problem
with a goal of predicting particle formation and growth. Deep learning methods [ 18] for supervised
learning have proven successful in a multitude of scientiﬁc and engineering tasks, and can be therefore
evaluated in this context. Such pre-trained models (e.g., convolutional / recurrent neural network
architectures) can then be incorporated straight-forwardly into GCMs. In the context of transfer learn-
ing [ 24,27], domain adaptation techniques (e.g., ﬁne-tuning) can be utilized to transfer knowledge
between various data domains, that is to compensate for covariate shifts between measurements in
different conditions (e.g., between chamber experiments and in situ ground station measurements). It
is noted that while accuracy is the primary metric to optimize for in this setting, interpretability and
explainability is crucial for developing further intuition into the physical processeses underlying NPF.
To this end, methods that attempt to explain the decision making carried out by Deep Networks can
be employed [ 21,5]. However, interpretability is still very much an open problem in deep learning,
and alternative approaches can be explored as discussed in what follows.
Discovering insights to better process understanding. While building accurate global machine
learning models is crucial for reducing the uncertainty in climate projections, discovering further
insights regarding the new particle formation process can improve the understanding of the process,
and can further guide future observation campaigns. In this light, we propose to help domain
scientists by identifying interactions ( interdependencies ) between nucleating species (e.g., H2SO4,
volatile organic compounds, HOMs) and ambient conditions (e.g., temperature, humidity), to gain
further insight into the new particle formation process, and disentangle the factors that contribute
to particle formation. Methods based on tensor decomposition [ 13] can be evaluated either in an
unsupervised manner, to capture the principal modes of variation of the data along with the structure
of the underlying interactions in a core tensor, as well as in a supervised learning context [ 23], where
high-order interactions and multiplicative interactions [ 7] can be captured quickly, often in linear
time. Such techniques consist of multi-linear generalizations of linear algorithms, and therefore
preserve interpretability while increasing the model capacity. Finally, tree-based methods such as
random forests, and the recently proposed Neural-backed Decision trees [ 29], have been shown to
provide similar performance to state-of-the-art deep learning methods, while providing a detailed
breakdown of the decision rules that lead to a predictive result. This family of methods can provide
detailed insights on the interdependencies of species concentrations as well as the effect of ambient
conditions on phenomena related to NPF.
4 Conclusions
Using Machine Learning methods can overcome the long-standing challenges in understanding
and simulating aerosol nucleation and growth by ingesting the data from diverse sources into a
uniﬁed, global, multi-component parameterisation, valid throughout the atmosphere. This in turn
will decrease the largest uncertainty in climate projections and provide a tool to effectively tackle air
quality problems caused by urbanisation and population growth.
References
[1]Meinrat O Andreae, Otávio C Acevedo, A Araùjo, Paulo Artaxo, Cybelli GG Barbosa, HMJ Barbosa,
J Brito, Samara Carbone, Xuguang Chi, BBL Cintra, et al. The Amazon Tall Tower Observatory (ATTO):
overview of pilot measurements on ecosystem ecology, meteorology, trace gases, and aerosols. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics , 15(18):10723–10776, 2015.
[2]CAM Brenninkmeijer, P Crutzen, F Boumard, T Dauer, B Dix, R Ebinghaus, D Filippi, H Fischer, H Franke,
U Frieß, et al. Civil aircraft for the regular investigation of the atmosphere based on an instrumented
container: The new caribic system. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 7(18):4953–4976, 2007.
[3]Miikka Dal Maso, Markku Kulmala, Ilona Riipinen, Robert Wagner, Tareq Hussein, Pasi P Aalto, and
Kari EJ Lehtinen. Formation and growth of fresh atmospheric aerosols: eight years of aerosol size
distribution data from SMEAR II, Hyytiala, Finland. Boreal environment research , 10(5):323, 2005.
3[4]Eimear M Dunne, Hamish Gordon, Andreas Kürten, João Almeida, Jonathan Duplissy, Christina
Williamson, Ismael K Ortega, Kirsty J Pringle, Alexey Adamov, Urs Baltensperger, et al. Global at-
mospheric particle formation from cern cloud measurements. Science , 354(6316):1119–1124, 2016.
[5]Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi.
A survey of methods for explaining black box models. ACM computing surveys (CSUR) , 51(5):1–42, 2018.
[6]Song Guo, Min Hu, Misti L Zamora, Jianfei Peng, Dongjie Shang, Jing Zheng, Zhuofei Du, Zhijun Wu,
Min Shao, Limin Zeng, et al. Elucidating severe urban haze formation in China. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences , 111(49):17373–17378, 2014.
[7]Siddhant M Jayakumar, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Jacob Menick, Jonathan Schwarz, Jack Rae, Simon
Osindero, Yee Whye Teh, Tim Harley, and Razvan Pascanu. Multiplicative interactions and where to ﬁnd
them. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019.
[8]Jorma Joutsensaari, Matthew Ozon, Tuomo Nieminen, Santtu Mikkonen, Timo Lähivaara, Stefano Decesari,
M Cristina Facchini, Ari Laaksonen, and Kari EJ Lehtinen. Identiﬁcation of new particle formation events
with deep learning. 2018.
[9]Astrid Kiendler-Scharr, Jürgen Wildt, Miikka Dal Maso, Thorsten Hohaus, Einhard Kleist, Thomas F
Mentel, Ralf Tillmann, Ricarda Uerlings, Uli Schurr, and Andreas Wahner. New particle formation in
forests inhibited by isoprene emissions. Nature , 461(7262):381–384, 2009.
[10] Ki-Hyun Kim, Ehsanul Kabir, and Shamin Kabir. A review on the human health impact of airborne
particulate matter. Environment international , 74:136–143, 2015.
[11] Jasper Kirkby, Joachim Curtius, João Almeida, Eimear Dunne, Jonathan Duplissy, Sebastian Ehrhart,
Alessandro Franchin, Stéphanie Gagné, Luisa Ickes, Andreas Kürten, et al. Role of sulphuric acid, ammonia
and galactic cosmic rays in atmospheric aerosol nucleation. Nature , 476(7361):429–433, 2011.
[12] Jasper Kirkby, Jonathan Duplissy, Kamalika Sengupta, Carla Frege, Hamish Gordon, Christina Williamson,
Martin Heinritzi, Mario Simon, Chao Yan, João Almeida, et al. Ion-induced nucleation of pure biogenic
particles. Nature , 533(7604):521–526, 2016.
[13] Tamara G Kolda and Brett W Bader. Tensor decompositions and applications. SIAM review , 51(3):455–500,
2009.
[14] Jenni Kontkanen, Tinja Olenius, Markku Kulmala, Ilona Riipinen, et al. Exploring the potential of nano-
köhler theory to describe the growth of atmospheric molecular clusters by organic vapors using cluster
kinetics simulations. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 2018.
[15] M Kulmala, V-M Kerminen, T Petäjä, AJ Ding, and L Wang. Atmospheric gas-to-particle conversion: why
NPF events are observed in megacities? Faraday discussions , 200:271–288, 2017.
[16] M Kulmala, M Dal Maso, JM Mäkelä, L Pirjola, M Väkevä, P Aalto, P Miikkulainen, K Hämeri, and
CD O’dowd. On the formation, growth and composition of nucleation mode particles. Tellus B , 53(4):479–
490, 2001.
[17] Markku Kulmala, Jenni Kontkanen, Heikki Junninen, Katrianne Lehtipalo, Hanna E Manninen, Tuomo
Nieminen, Tuukka Petäjä, Mikko Sipilä, Siegfried Schobesberger, Pekka Rantala, et al. Direct observations
of atmospheric aerosol nucleation. Science , 339(6122):943–946, 2013.
[18] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature , 521(7553):436–444, 2015.
[19] Katrianne Lehtipalo, Chao Yan, Lubna Dada, Federico Bianchi, Mao Xiao, Robert Wagner, Dominik
Stolzenburg, Lauri R Ahonen, Antonio Amorim, Andrea Baccarini, et al. Multicomponent new particle
formation from sulfuric acid, ammonia, and biogenic vapors. Science advances , 4(12):eaau5363, 2018.
[20] J. Merikanto, D. V . Spracklen, G. W. Mann, S. J. Pickering, and K. S. Carslaw. Impact of nucleation on
global CCN. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 9(21):8601–8616, 2009.
[21] Grégoire Montavon, Wojciech Samek, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Methods for interpreting and understand-
ing deep neural networks. Digital Signal Processing , 73:1–15, 2018.
[22] A. A. Nair and F. Yu. Using machine learning to derive cloud condensation nuclei number concentrations
from commonly available measurements. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 20(21):12853–12869, 2020.
[23] Alexander Novikov, Mikhail Troﬁmov, and Ivan V . Oseledets. Exponential machines. In 5th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Workshop Track
Proceedings . OpenReview.net, 2017.
4[24] Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge and
data engineering , 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.
[25] John H Seinfeld and Spyros N Pandis. Atmospheric chemistry and physics: from air pollution to climate
change . John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[26] Thomas F Stocker, Dahe Qin, Gian-Kasper Plattner, Melinda Tignor, Simon K Allen, Judith Boschung,
Alexander Nauels, Yu Xia, Vincent Bex, Pauline M Midgley, et al. Climate change 2013: The physical
science basis. Contribution of working group I to the ﬁfth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel
on climate change , 1535, 2013.
[27] Chuanqi Tan, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Wenchang Zhang, Chao Yang, and Chunfang Liu. A survey on deep
transfer learning. In International conference on artiﬁcial neural networks , pages 270–279. Springer, 2018.
[28] Tørseth, Kjetil and Aas, Wenche and Breivik, Knut and Fjæraa, Ann Mari and Fiebig, Markus and
Hjellbrekke, Anne-Gunn and Lund Myhre, C and Solberg, Sverre and Yttri, Karl Espen. Introduction
to the European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (EMEP) and observed atmospheric composition
change during 1972–2009. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 12(12):5447–5481, 2012.
[29] Alvin Wan, Lisa Dunlap, Daniel Ho, Jihan Yin, Scott Lee, Henry Jin, Suzanne Petryk, Sarah Adel Bargal,
and Joseph E Gonzalez. NBDT: Neural-Backed Decision Trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00221 , 2020.
[30] Fangqun Yu and Gan Luo. Simulation of particle size distribution with a global aerosol model: contribution
of nucleation to aerosol and CCN number concentrations. Atmospheric Chemistry & Physics Discussions ,
9(2), 2009.
5