GeoLabels: Towards Efﬁcient Ecosystem Monitoring
using Data Programming on Geospatial Information
David Dao
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
daviddao@inf.ethz.chJohannes Rausch
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
johannes.rausch@inf.ethz.ch
Ce Zhang
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch
Abstract
Monitoring, Reporting and Veriﬁcation (MRV) systems for land use play a key role
in the decision-making of climate investors, policymakers and conservationists. Re-
mote sensing is commonly used for MRV but practical solutions are constrained by
a lack of labels to train machine learning-based downstream tasks. GeoLabels is an
automated MRV system that can rapidly adapt to novel applications by leveraging
existing geospatial information and domain expertise to quickly create training sets
through data programming. Moreover, GeoLabels uses dimensionality reduction
interfaces, allowing non-technical users to create visual labeling functions.
1 Introduction
Humanity is in the midst of an unprecedented climate crisis, demanding urgent, decisive action
in line with the Paris Agreement. Land use plays a crucial role in our climate, taking up about a
quarter of annual anthropogenic carbon emissions. Careless usage of land includes a wide range of
critical issues, including deforestation and forest degradation through agriculture, turning natural
carbon sinks into carbon sources. Monitoring, Reporting and Veriﬁcation (MRV) of land use is
a key task of global forest conservation efforts [ 1], climate ﬁnance instruments, such as REDD+,
Payment for Ecosystem Services and biodiversity schemes [ 2]. As such, MRV creates baselines
and impact assessments for policy and decision makers. The promise that remote sensing holds for
MRV is considerable. Earth observations from aircraft or satellite-based sensors combined with
recent advances in computer vision have an enormous potential in automatically monitoring land
that is vast and otherwise difﬁcult to access. Although remote sensing provides a huge supply of
data of detailed temporal and spatial resolutions, many practical solutions and actionable projects
are constrained by a lack of task-speciﬁc labels. Current approaches to this problem require manual
labeling (leveraging visual interpretation tools such as Collect Earth [ 3]) and an enormous amount of
data cleaning, munging, and handling from domain experts. As such, annotating data for automated
systems has become the biggest cost (and time) factor. The lack of available labeled data prevents the
rapid adaptation/scaling of systems to new downstream tasks, or for new data sources.
We propose GeoLabels: An automated MRV land use monitoring system that addresses the high
cost of manual annotation by leveraging existing geospatial information and weak supervision of
Equal contribution.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.Figure 1: An overview of the labeling process of GeoLabels. Domain experts can select sets of tiles in
different modalities (displayed using dimensionality reduction on tile2vec) and deﬁne visual labeling
functions for data programming.
domain experts. GeoLabels provides a ﬂexible approach that scales to different ecological and
environmental downstream tasks for MRV that require non-technical domain knowledge such as tree
species classiﬁcation, land use segmentation or emission tracking.
2 Data Programming for Geospatial Maps
GeoLabels applies data programming [ 4], a method that is used to build massive, weakly labeled
datasets by allowing users to deﬁne labeling functions instead of hand-labeling individual examples
[5]. Based on overlaps of multiple labeling functions for given data points, a generative model is
trained in order to predict probabilistic labels.
2.1 Extending Labeling Functions for Geospatial Data
Data programming is commonly used for textual data, where unsupervised methods such as Word2Vec
[6] are used in order enrich words with high-dimensional representations. The lack of representation
that incorporate rich contextual information for geospatial data has previously posed a challenge in
writing labeling functions with high discriminate power. Tile2Vec [ 7], a technique for unsupervised
representation learning on spatially distributed data has recently been introduced. Using this technique,
map tiles can automatically be associated with vector embeddings that encode information such
as visual similarity or spatial proximity. As vector embeddings can be generated for different
modalities e.g. hyper-spectral satellite images, and spatial environmental and ecological maps, human
annotators are able to deﬁne labeling functions that incorporate one or more modalities. For instance,
environmental maps (e.g. annual temperature, annual precipitation) combined with ecological
maps (e.g. nitrogen mineralization, soil PH) and raw satellite data (e.g. Sentinel, LANDSAT) can
provide human annotators enough information to determine reforestation potential [ 8]. Combining
overlapping labeling functions with the generated vector embeddings allows for the training of a
generative model that automatically estimates the accuracy of the individual labeling functions.
2.2 Dimensionality Reduction as Labeling UI for Domain Experts
GeoLabels leverages domain expertise from non-technical users by allowing them to visually design
labeling functions with dimensionality reduction (see Figure 1). Tile2Vec representations of different
geospatial data sources are mapped to a lower dimension via PCA - allowing domain experts to
visually interpret data. The domain experts can then select sets from different sources and deﬁne
relationships between them. GeoLabels will automatically generate an internal labeling function
from the user’s input (e.g. distance from point x in Tile2Vec space).
3 Discussion
GeoLabels facilitates training of machine learning-based MRVs for various downstream tasks by
leveraging domain expertise and combining it with a variety of available geospatial data sources.
2Over the coming years, geospatial data is expected to grow rapidly, with more and more observation
infrastructure in place (smaller satellites, more cost-efﬁcient launching rockets). Better technology
deployed as part of this growing infrastructure will deliver higher resolution images, as well as
different non-image data streams. An interpretable and adaptable MRV system is therefore crucial to
guide climate investors and policymakers in their decision-making.
References
[1]David Dao, Catherine Cang, Clement Fung, Ming Zhang, Nick Pawlowski, Reuven Gonzales,
Nick Beglinger, and Ce Zhang. GainForest: Scaling Climate Finance for Forest Conservation
using Interpretable Machine Learning on Satellite Imagery. ICML Climate Change AI workshop
2019 .
[2]Sandra Díaz, Sebsebe Demissew, Julia Carabias, Carlos Joly, Mark Lonsdale, Neville Ash, Anne
Larigauderie, Jay Ram Adhikari, Salvatore Arico, András Báldi, et al. The IPBES Conceptual
Framework—connecting nature and people. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability ,
14:1–16, 2015.
[3]Adia Bey, Alfonso Sánchez-Paus Díaz, Danae Maniatis, Giulio Marchi, Danilo Mollicone,
Stefano Ricci, Jean-François Bastin, Rebecca Moore, Sandro Federici, Marcelo Rezende, et al.
Collect earth: Land use and land cover assessment through augmented visual interpretation.
Remote Sensing , 8(10):807, 2016.
[4]Alexander J Ratner, Christopher M De Sa, Sen Wu, Daniel Selsam, and Christopher Ré. Data
programming: Creating large training sets, quickly. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 3567–3575, 2016.
[5]Alexander Ratner, Stephen H. Bach, Henry Ehrenberg, Jason Fries, Sen Wu, and Christopher
Ré. Snorkel: Rapid Training Data Creation with Weak Supervision. Proc. VLDB Endow. ,
11(3):269–282, November 2017.
[6]Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed repre-
sentations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pages 3111–3119, 2013.
[7]Neal Jean, Sherrie Wang, Anshul Samar, George Azzari, David Lobell, and Stefano Ermon.
Tile2Vec: Unsupervised representation learning for spatially distributed data. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 3967–3974, 2019.
[8]Jean-Francois Bastin, Yelena Finegold, Claude Garcia, Danilo Mollicone, Marcelo Rezende,
Devin Routh, Constantin M. Zohner, and Thomas W. Crowther. The global tree restoration
potential. Science , 365(6448):76–79, 2019.
3