Emerging Trends of Sustainability Reporting in the ICT
Industry: Insights from Discriminative Topic Mining
Lin Shi
Stanford University
linshi@stanford.eduYen Nhi Truong Vu
Stanford University
ntruongv@stanford.edu
Abstract
The Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) industry has a considerable cli-
mate change impact and accounts for approximately 3 percent of global carbon emissions.
Despite the increasing availability of sustainability reports provided by ICT companies,
we still lack a systematic understanding of what impacts have been disclosed at an in-
dustry level. In this paper, we make the ﬁrst major effort to use modern unsupervised
learning methods to investigate the sustainability reporting themes and trends of the ICT
industry over the past two decades. We build a cross-sector dataset containing 22,534
environmental reports from 1999 to 2019, of which 2,187 are ICT speciﬁc. We then apply
CatE, a text-embedding-based topic modeling method, to mine speciﬁc keywords that ICT
companies use to report on climate change and energy. As a result, we identify (1) im-
portant shifts in ICT companies’ climate change narratives from physical metrics towards
climate-related disasters, (2) key organizations with large inﬂuence on ICT companies,
and (3) ICT companies’ increasing focus on data center and server energy efﬁciency.
1 Introduction
The Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) industry is a sizable industry that accounts for
an estimated global economic worth of $11.5 trillion and 15.5 percent of global GDP [ 1]. The growth
of the ICT industry has increased its environmental and social impacts to a level of global concern. In
particular, research shows that the ICT industry currently accounts for approximately 3 percent of the global
annual carbon footprint. This percentage is expected to grow as the world is increasingly reliant on digital
technologies [2].
At an industry level, an increasing but small number of ICT companies have demonstrated understanding
of their environmental and social impacts within their supply chains through information disclosure and
external veriﬁcation [ 3]. Yet, we still lack a systematic understanding of what has been disclosed. We have
limited contextual and empirical understanding of how sustainability practices have developed in the ICT
sector and how they have evolved over time.
This paper demonstrates our effort to create a text database of companies’ sustainability disclosures over
the past two decades from the largest sustainability reporting database. Subsequently we use unsupervised
natural language processing (NLP) methods to uncover the shifting themes and narratives from companies
in the ICT industry over time. In particular, we focus on companies’ sustainability disclosures relevant to
climate change and energy programs. To extract information relevant to these speciﬁc topics, we propose
to shift from the standard Latent Dirichlet Allocation [ 4] topic modeling tool and instead apply CatE, a
text-embedding based, category-guided topic mining method [ 5], to retrieve representative words and phrases
that showcase how companies interpret and establish policies regarding climate change over time.
Through our experiments, we found that ICT companies’ sustainability reporting related to climate change
has shifted from the initial focus on the heat-trapping gases and pollutants contributing to climate change
towards climate-related extremes and disasters intensiﬁed by climate change. Over time, the climate
policy narratives have shifted from mitigation and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions to adaptation and
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.preparedness for the impacts of climate change. Over time, nonproﬁts and international climate conferences
have been increasingly and consistently mentioned by ICT companies.
2 Relevant Works
Computational text analysis has been adopted as a beneﬁcial tool in environmental studies only in recent years.
Researchers have used it for environmental meta-reviews and organizations’ sustainability disclosures, where
it helps create “comprehensive, replaceable, interdisciplinary reviews that provide rapid, up-to-date, and
policy-relevant reports of existing work” [6]. Early studies used word frequency analysis to understand the
topical focus of companies’ sustainability programs [ 7]. More recently, topic modeling has been applied as a
tool in reviewing textual data in climate change related areas of environmental science, including identifying
emerging themes in life cycle assessment literature as well as companies’ sustainability reporting [ 8,9]. The
most commonly used technique is the Latent Dirichlet Algorithm (LDA) [ 4]. LDA is an unsupervised method
that learns topic-word and document-topic distributions by modeling the generative process of the corpus. In
prior analyses using text mining, LDA was used to explore main topics in companies’ sustainability reporting
between 1995 to 2005 and has revealed a broad picture of companies’ sustainability practices and generic
reporting themes in economic, social, and environmental dimensions [9].
However, a constraint of applying LDA is that the topical results are generic and non-discriminative. It does
not enhance our understanding of speciﬁc sustainability issues such as climate change. As a result, LDA is
not a suitable tool for more speciﬁc discovery-focused questions, such as “How do companies’ sustainability
reporting and policy shift around climate change?” In the NLP literature, there is a line of research on
this issue, where users can provide a list of seed words to guide the topic discovery process [ 10,11,5]. In
particular, we choose to employ the CatE model [ 5], which is a method that learns discriminative category-
guided word embeddings and selects category-representative keywords based on embedding similarity
and word distributional speciﬁcity. As a result, CatE learns an embedding space that best separates the
user-interested set of categories and thus retrieve speciﬁc words that are speciﬁc to each topic.
3 Dataset
We build a large database containing 22,534 environmental reports by 8,088 companies in 118 countries from
1999 to 2019. The data are scraped from the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) database [ 12], the largest
publicly-available global sustainability reporting database. Companies voluntarily provide their metadata as
well as sustainability reports to GRI, and they are also responsible for maintaining and hosting the reports.
As a result, in addition to scraping the data using the links provided in GRI database, we conducted additional
data collection via the Internet Archive and Google search engine when the url provided by GRI is not valid.
In addition to the original reports, which are mostly PDFs, we also provide extracted texts which are parsed
using the Apache Tika engine [ 13]. We choose Tika because it is the de facto standard technology for textual
content and metadata extraction, and it has a robust language detection algorithm. For each text ﬁle provided
in the dataset, our dataset also includes metadata information such as the company name, size, country, etc.
(Appendix A). This information is scraped from GRI database as well as ﬁle metadata. In the original GRI
database, there is noise in the year label; for example, a report on the year 1999 but published in 2006 may
be labeled as 2006. In this case, we manually correct the report year to 1999. In our dataset, we similarly
corrected the labels of reports whose published year differs from report year by more than 1 year.
In this study, we concern ourselves only with English reports from the ICT industry. The ICT companies
are selected based on their sectors. In this study, we include “Computers”, “Technology Hardware,” and
“Telecommunications” as part of the ICT industry. After ﬁltering, we have a total of 2,187 documents from
429 companies in 77 countries.
4 Method
Preprocessing We remove special characters, common English stopwords as well as company names and
standalone numbers from our corpus. Removing company names and standalone numbers is important
because the text documents are parsed from PDFs, where company names and meaningless numbers may
appear widely in the text due to their presence in every page header and footer. In our experiments, keeping
the company names and numbers negatively affects the quality of topic modeling.
2Phrasal Segmentation In order to retrieve not only representative words but also quality phrases for
topic modeling, we also apply AutoPhrase [ 14] to segment our corpus. This is critical because without
phrase mining, topic modeling can only return single words, while we may be more interested in concepts
such as “greenhouse gas”, “carbon offset”, “energy efﬁcient”. AutoPhrase is chosen as it is an automated
phrase mining framework that incorporates quality phrases from public knowledge databases such as
Wikipedia, and it also allows incorporation of domain knowledge for such phrase mining. We provide seed
phrases (Appendix B) that are collected from up-to-date conference summaries from Business for Social
Responsibility (BSR) and Electronics Goes Green (EGG) 2020+ conference proceedings [15, 16].
Mining Topic Representative Keywords We apply the CatE algorithm [ 5], which leverages user provided
categories to learn category-distinctive word embeddings. The algorithm then uses the learned word
embedding similarity and word distributional speciﬁcity to generate relevant keywords that represent topics
of user interests. Our procedure is as follows:
1.Identify key topic names of interest provided by domain experts. Here, as a ﬁrst exploratory pass, we
investigate two topics “climate change” and “energy”. In general, each topic can be represented by a list of
seed words; for example, an expert could guide the model by providing keywords such as “global warming”,
“mitigation,” and “emission” for the “climate change” topic.
2.Bootstrap CatE ntimes to extract Krepresentative keywords each time for each topic, and choose s < n
results with highest topic coherence score. Out of the set of keywords represented in these sruns, extract
theRkeywords that appear the most times. These steps are implemented to reduce model variance. In our
experiments, we choose n= 15 ,s= 10 ,K=R= 100 .
The CatE algorithm [ 5] allows initialization from pretrained word embeddings such as Word2Vec [ 17], GloVe
[18], etc. Here, we use pretrained 200-dimensional spherical text embeddings [ 19] because embedding in
spherical space provides state-of-the-art performance on word similarity and document clustering, which is
beneﬁcial for the topic mining task.
5 Results
In order to visualize the important subtopics within each of the two topics “climate change” and “energy”,
we perform k-means clustering [ 20] on the retrieved topic representative words. Then, principal component
analysis is applied to project the 200-dimensional word embeddings onto a visualizable 2-dimensional space
spanned by the ﬁrst two principal components that capture the highest variance in the embeddings.
Climate Change Narratives Figure 1 provides clustering visualization for the top 50 words representing
the climate change topic. Our results suggest that in the early years (before 2010) of reporting, ICT companies
focus on reporting heat-trapping gases and pollutants contributing to climate change and mitigation as a
Figure 1: Top 50 words and phrases representative for the topic “climate change”
3strategy. Speciﬁc greenhouse gases and metrics such as carbon, NOx, CFCs, and PFCs are consistently
covered and discussed. Since 2010, ICT companies incorporate more organizations and policy in their
sustainability reporting and mention adaptation as a strategy. Additionally, there are increasing number of
direct mentions of "disaster" and "catastrophe" as well as descriptions about climate-related extremes and
disasters intensiﬁed by climate change, such as storm, ﬂood, and drought. Quantitatively, we found that the
percentage of documents mentioning speciﬁc greenhouse gas substances like CFCs, PFCs steadily drops
from 67.6% to 30.0% over 2006-2018, while the percentage of documents mentioning a climate-related
disaster steadily increases over the same period.
Figure 2: Heatmap showing percentage of documents
mentioning organizations over years. Organization
acronyms are deﬁned in Appendix C.Institutional Inﬂuence Based on the top 100
words and phrases representative for the topic “cli-
mate change,” we identify a comprehensive list of
organizations and policies in companies’ report-
ing (Appendix C). We select 8 primary organiza-
tions to highlight their percentage of appearance
between 2006 to 2018 in Figure 2. International
non-proﬁt organizations, inter-governmental agen-
cies, and industry-wide initiatives are consistently
mentioned in ICT companies’ reporting over time.
The Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) is the most
inﬂuential among them on the basis of appearance.
Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSi) is the only
ICT industry speciﬁc organization that’s been con-
sistently mentioned.
Energy Programs Another trend we discover is the shifting emphasis in ICT companies’ energy programs.
Before 2010, ICT companies’ energy programs fall into two major categories: building energy and energy
production. In recent years, ICT companies start to emphasize data center and server energy programs in the
context of energy savings and efﬁciency (Figure D.1 in the Appendix).
6 Conclusion and Future Work
Our main discovery is that ICT companies collectively have shifted narratives on climate change from
focusing on describing the physical drivers contributing to climate change towards emphasizing climate-
related disasters exacerbated by climate change. Given that ICT companies who report to GRI are early
adopters of sustainability practices, this ﬁnding suggests that a potential opportunity to motivate other
companies in the industry to initiate their own climate policy is to educate them on climate-related disasters
and consequences.
We identiﬁed a comprehensive list of institutions that frequently appear in ICT companies’ reporting,
suggesting their inﬂuential role in ICT companies’ climate change decision-making. Studies in corporate
environmental management have used institutional theory to analyze stakeholders that encourage ﬁrms to
adopt environmental management practices beyond regulatory compliance [ 21]. Although there is evidence of
stakeholders imposing pressure on companies to move beyond compliance, the role of speciﬁc organizations
within a particular industry is often unclear. Our results provide initial insights towards understanding and
discovering the amount of relative inﬂuence among critical stakeholders in the ICT industry.
In addition, sustainability focus, priorities, and approaches within speciﬁc industrial sectors are traditionally
studied using methods such as manual coding, survey, and interview. Text analysis provides a less resource
intensive and ﬂexible method complimentary to previous studies. It also allows deep-dives into speciﬁc
topics of interest, uncovering the latest trends in the industry. For example, our results in the energy program
suggest that ICT companies are diversifying their climate and energy policies from the emissions implications
of buildings, facilities, and energy generation, towards full consideration of climate change impacts affecting
data centers and servers.
Given these promising results, we believe that further expansion of this project could help identify meaningful
incentives to guide companies towards designing and executing sustainability practices. In particular, we aim
to apply this framework to topics such as certiﬁcation and audits, which are also critical to the ICT industry.
In addition, we could compare the ICT sector to other sectors that have longstanding history of sustainability
practices (such as food, textile, and forest products) in order to identify inﬂuential factors and stakeholders
that are both speciﬁc to and common across sectors on the topic of climate change and sustainability.
4References
[1]Kwadwo Frimpong Sun and Makada Henry-Nickie Hao. Trends in the Information Technology Sector.
Technical report, March 2019.
[2]Lotﬁ Belkhir and Ahmed Elmeligi. Assessing ICT global emissions footprint: Trends to 2040 &
recommendations. Journal of Cleaner Production , 177:448–463, March 2018.
[3] Tannis Thorlakson, Joann F de Zegher, and Eric F Lambin. Companies’ contribution to sustainability
through global supply chains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America , 115(9):2072–2077, February 2018.
[4]David M Blei, Andrew Y . Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , pages 993–1022, 2003.
[5]Yu Meng, Jiaxin Huang, Guangyuan Wang, Zihan Wang, Chao Zhang, Yu Zhang, and Jiawei Han.
Discriminative topic mining via category-name guided text embedding. In Proceedings of The Web
Conference 2020 , pages 2121–2132, 2020.
[6]Emily Grubert and Anne Siders. Beneﬁts and applications of interdisciplinary digital tools for en-
vironmental meta-reviews and analyses. Environmental Research Letters , 11(9):093001, September
2016.
[7]Wan Te Liew, Arief Adhitya, and Rajagopalan Srinivasan. Sustainability trends in the process industries:
A text mining-based analysis. Computers in Industry , 65(3):393–400, April 2014.
[8]Emily Grubert. Implicit prioritization in life cycle assessment: text mining and detecting metapatterns
in the literature. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment , 22(2):148–158, February 2017.
[9]Nadine Székely and Jan vom Brocke. What can we learn from corporate sustainability reporting?
Deriving propositions for research and practice from over 9,500 corporate sustainability reports
published between 1999 and 2015 using topic modelling technique. PLOS ONE , 12(4):e0174807, April
2017.
[10] Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi, Hal Daumé III, and Raghavendra Udupa. Incorporating lexical priors into
topic models. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pages 204–213, 2012.
[11] David Andrzejewski and Xiaojin Zhu. Latent dirichlet allocation with topic-in-set knowledge. In
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Semi-Supervised Learning for Natural Language
Processing , pages 43–48, 2009.
[12] Global Reporting Initiative. Global reporting initiative database. https://database.
globalreporting.org .
[13] Apache Software Foundation. Tika. https://tika.apache.org .
[14] Jingbo Shang, Jialu Liu, Meng Jiang, Xiang Ren, Clare R V oss, and Jiawei Han. Automated phrase min-
ing from massive text corpora. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 30(10):1825–
1837, 2018.
[15] Business for Social Responsibility (BSR). The State of Sustainable Business in 2019. Technical report.
[16] Electronics Goes Green 2020+ Proceedings . Fraunhofer IZM and Technical University, 2020.
[17] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efﬁcient estimation of word representations
in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 , 2013.
[18] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (EMNLP) , pages 1532–1543, 2014.
[19] Yu Meng, Jiaxin Huang, Guangyuan Wang, Chao Zhang, Honglei Zhuang, Lance Kaplan, and Jiawei
Han. Spherical text embedding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
8208–8217, 2019.
5[20] Stuart Lloyd. Least squares quantization in pcm. IEEE transactions on information theory , 28(2):129–
137, 1982.
[21] Magali Delmas and Michael W. Toffel. Stakeholders and environmental management practices: an
institutional framework. Business Strategy and the Environment , 13(4):209–222.
6Acknowledgement
We thank Professor Katharine Mach, Professor Adam Brandt, and Rebecca Miller for reviewing the study
draft and providing constructive feedback. We also thank Aroma Mahendru for her valuable mentorship and
the Climate Change AI NeurIPS 2020 team for organizing the mentorship program.
A Dataset Metadata
For each report in the dataset, we include metadata that comprises of the reporting company’s name, size,
type, listing status, sector, country, country status, region, publication year, reporting year, external assurance,
reporting language, and whether the company is a part of/reports to/abides to the following organizations:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP),
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
B Seed Phrases Provided to AutoPhrase
climate change, sustainable products, economic sustainability, social sustainability, environmental health
safety, local supplier, employee beneﬁts, community investment, human rights, health safety, energy
efﬁciency, energy efﬁcient, renewable energy, natural gas, green chemistry, biodiversity, sustainable product,
sustainable products, code of conduct, responsible business alliance, regulated substances, supplier risk,
supplier training, conﬂict free, supplier audit, life cycle assessment, materiality analysis, material analysis,
carbon offset, carbon footprint, circular economy
C Top Organizations and Protocols in 2006-2018
United Nations (UN), European Union (EU), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), European Telecommunications Network Operators (ETNO),
United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP), United Nations Global Compact (UNGC), ICT for
Energy Efﬁciency (ICT4EE), United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSi), Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
(REDD), Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), Green House Gas Protocol (GHGP), World Business Council for
Sustainable Development (WBCSD), Science Based Target Initiatives (SBT), World Wildlife Fund (WWF),
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), World Resources Institute (WRI), International
Telecommunication Union (ITU), Conference of the Parties 10 (COP10), Paris Agreement, Kyoto Protocol.
D Energy Representative Keywords
Figure D.1: Subcluster in top 50 words for topic "energy"
7