Unlocking the Potential of Green Virtual Bidding
Strategies : A Pathway to a Low-Carbon Electricity
Market
Aya Laajil
Centrale Supélec
aya.laajil@student-cs.frLoubna Benabbou
Université du Québec à Rimouski
Mila - Québec AI Institute
loubna_benabbou@uqar.ca
Frédérique M.Gagnon
VidensAnalytics
frederique.m.gagnon@vidensanalytics.comLaurent Barcelo
VidensAnalytics
Laurent.barcelo@vidensanalytics.com
Ghait Boukachab
VidensAnalytics
ghait.boukachab@@vidensanalytics.com
Abstract
The increasing importance of renewable energy in mitigating climate change has
led to a critical examination of electricity market mechanisms that can support
this transition. Virtual bidding, a financial tool used within electricity markets,
allows market participants to capitalize on discrepancies between the Day-Ahead
(DA) and Real-Time (RT) prices of electricity. The introduction of virtual bidding
within electricity markets has introduced significant changes in market dynamics,
with implications for environmental outcomes. It supports the transition towards
a greener energy mix by favoring the dispatch of renewable resources and con-
tributing to more efficient market conditions. This proposal seeks to explore the
impact of virtual bidding and the development of green virtual bidding strategies
by leveraging advanced machine learning models.
1 Introduction
The transition to a low-carbon economy is imperative in the fight against climate change, with the
energy sector responsible for approximately 75% of global greenhouse gas emissions [ 1]. Achieving
net-zero emissions by 2050 will require a 70%-80% reduction in carbon emissions from the energy
sector [ 2], which is expected to involve increasing the share of renewables in global electricity
generation to over 85% by 2050 [ 1]. Virtual bidding involves market participants taking financial
positions without the intent of physically delivering or consuming electricity. It increases market
liquidity and allows market participants to hedge against price volatility between the DA and RT
markets [ 3,4], and reduces price discrepancies [ 5]. Converging prices between the two markets
reduce electricity price volatility, providing more stable price signals and leads to a better resource
allocation [ 6]. Moreover, the introduction of virtual bidding in California for instance has led to a
reduction of CO2 emissions which resulted from a better generation resource allocation [ 7]. Virtual
bidding strategies within electricity markets supports progress towards Sustainable Development
Goals [ 8], mainly SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy) and SDG 13 (Climate Action). Our study
aims to develop green virtual bidding strategies by leveraging advanced machine learning models
and optimization algorithms, aligning with the shift toward a green energy economy that reflects
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2024.the growing prioritization of sustainability by investors and governments [ 9,10,11,12]. Accurate
forecasting is critical for the success of green virtual bidding strategies. The reliance on machine
learning models to predict market impacts and optimize bidding strategies introduces challenges.
2 Machine Learning to enhance virtual bidding strategies and address
climate change
Virtual bidding strategies depend on forecasts of price discrepancies between the DA and RT electricity
markets. The authors in [ 7,13] assert that these discrepancies often occur between DA and RT
electricity prices. The DA market is a forward market where electricity is traded a day prior to delivery,
with prices determined based on supply and demand forecasts for each hour of the next day. In
contrast, the RT market facilitates trading to balance supply and demand as they fluctuate throughout
the day. Prices are determined based on immediate system conditions and any discrepancies from
the DA schedule, [ 13]. In the absence of financial instruments designed to explicitly exploit price
differences, physical participants will use their assets to implicitly arbitrage these differences by
withholding load or generation in the DA market [ 7]. Such implicit arbitrage can entail costly actions
which may negatively affect system reliability and lead to inefficient resource allocation, potentially
increasing reliance on fossil fuels and exacerbating climate change impacts. The authors in [ 7] assert
that virtual bidding reduced the need for physical participants to engage in more expensive and
potentially distorting practices to take advantage of these electricity price differences. They used
CAISO (California Independent System Operator) price data from the years 2009 through 2012 to
compare the periods before and after the introduction of virtual bidding, which was introduced in
CAISO in 2011. They found, in [ 7], that following the introduction of explicit virtual bidding, price
differences between the DA and RT markets have diminished, RT price volatility decreased and there
was a reduction of CO2 emissions of between 537,000 and 650,000 tons annually.
The discrepancy between DA and RT prices introduces challenges for effective resource allocation.
Researchers have focused on highlighting the use of machine learning models in predicting DA
and RT price differences, particularly the occurrence of price spikes that can significantly impact
resource allocation and integration of renewable resources. [ 14] addresses the issue of forecasting
extreme variations in the DART spread (DA price - RT price), well-known as the DART spikes. They
consider the problem of forecasting these extreme negative DART spikes as the probability that a
negative DART spike occurs in a given hour based on available information in the Long Island zone
of the NYISO (New York Independent System Operator) market. Such a problem is expressed, in
[14], as a supervised learning problem which is tackled with four machine learning algorithms : (1)
logistic regression, (2) random forests, (3) gradient boosting trees, and (4) deep neural networks
(DNN), finding that gradient boosting trees slightly outperformed other models, achieving an AUC of
0.769 [ 14]. Their backtesting of trading strategies incorporating model-generated spike probabilities
demonstrated significantly higher profits, reduced risk, and improved risk-adjusted performance
compared to a baseline strategy. This highlights the economic value of their developed signal [ 14].
Furthermore, [ 15] presents a model to predict the values of the price gap between DA and RT prices
using statistical machine learning algorithms and deep neural networks. Their key findings include
the benefits of directly predicting the price gap over subtracting individual market predictions and
the significant impact of incorporating exogenous weather data on prediction accuracy. The authors
in [15] used an ensemble learning algorithm, Random Forest (RF) for feature selection, while a
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network [ 16,17] to capture long-term dependencies. Based on
two years of data from CAISO market, their proposed method demonstrated a 46% reduction in
prediction error, highlighting its potential to improve virtual bidding strategies and support operators.
Consequently, machine learning can enhance virtual bidding strategies by improving the accuracy of
the forecast of these DA and RT price discrepancies.
Our research will focus on developing green strategies, using machine learning models combined
with optimization algorithms, to balance multiple objectives, such as maximizing financial returns
and minimizing carbon emissions. By integrating environmental metrics (like carbon intensity or
percentage of renewable resources in the fuel energy mix) into the optimization process of virtual
bidding strategies, these models can contribute positively to climate change mitigation. Our approach
will involve analyzing historical and real-time data to generate insights that align with green energy
goals, ultimately supporting more efficient and environmentally-friendly virtual trading strategies.
23 Promoting renewable energy integration with virtual bidding
Virtual bidding enhances market efficiency and reduces price volatility [ 18,19], leading to a more
stable market. This mechanism fosters a more sustainable energy mix, contributing significantly to
the fight against climate change. When real demand ( Dreal) exceeds forecasts ( Dforecasted ), Virtual
Load ( VL), which involves buying in the DA market and selling back in the RT market, helps correct
this discrepancy by adding virtual electricity demand to the DA scheduling process [ 20]. Conversely,
whenDrealis lower than Dforecasted , Virtual Supply ( VS), which involves selling in the DA market
and buying back in the RT market, adds virtual electricity supply to the DA scheduling process [ 20].
Both mechanisms aim to reduce discrepancies between RT and DA prices, thereby improving market
efficiency [ 18,19,21]. When both scenarios align, where (Dreal> D forecasted )and (V L > V S )or
where (Dreal< D forecasted )and (V L < V S ), it signifies that market participants are making accurate
decisions regarding virtual bids.
Our application will initially focus on the NYISO market, with plans to expand to other U.S.
electricity markets. The NYISO manages New York’s electricity grid and wholesale markets and
supports the state’s ambitious climate goals, particularly the targets set by the Climate Leadership and
Community Protection Act (CLCPA) [ 22], and is actively working on the integration of renewable
energy resources in the fuel energy mix to support New York’s transition to a cleaner energy future.
Our work will help to quantify the impact of virtual bidding on the integration of renewable energy
resources in the fuel energy mix when market participants are making accurate decisions.
We define a binary variable, referred to as Impact , as outlined in equation (1).
Impact =(
1if(Dreal> D forecasted )∧(V L > V S )or(Dreal< D forecasted )∧(V L < V S )
0otherwise(1)
This variable provides an insight about market participants decisions, and could be added as a feature
to machine learning models to identify green virtual trading strategies. We could use it as a target
variable in classification models to identify periods when virtual bidding had a significant influence
on market conditions. Added to environmental metrics, this can help in identifying strategies that
consistently lead to favorable outcomes, and increased renewable energy integration in the fuel energy
mix leading to a reduction of carbon emissions.
Our first findings, using data [ 23,24] collected from selected zones within the NYISO control area
that include detailed records of electricity prices, demand, bid volumes, and the corresponding energy
mix, shows that when market participants are making accurate decisions towards their bids, the
percentage of renewable energy resources integrated in the energy mix are greater by an average of
1.28% . Although the difference between the groups might seem small, translating this difference
into CO2 emissions highlights its significant impact. Indeed, the total annual energy consumption in
NYISO is approximately 150 TWh [25]. The share of renewable energy stands at 27% [23]. With a
CO2 emission factor for fossil fuels of 0.5 tons CO2 per MWh (scope 1 emissions) [ 26], the existing
CO2 emissions are calculated based on the fossil fuel energy consumption of 109,500,000 MWh,
resulting in total emissions of 54,750,000 tons CO2. If the renewable energy share increases by
1.28% , fossil fuel energy consumption would decrease to 107,580,000 MWh, leading to a reduction
in CO2 emissions to 53,790,000 tons CO2. This would result in a total CO2 emissions reduction of
960,000 tons CO2.
Consequently, using projected generation mix data, we could implement a green virtual bidding
strategy by adjusting bids based on the projected share of renewable energy and price signals.
4 Conclusion
The growing importance of a green energy economy underscores a significant shift in both investor
and governmental priorities towards sustainability. There is an increasing interest in initiatives and
investments that promote environmentally-friendly practices within energy markets. Our project will
participate in this initiative by advancing green virtual trading strategies and supporting the transition
to a more sustainable energy system. By leveraging advanced machine learning models to enhance
the accuracy of price discrepancies forecasts, quantify virtual bidding impact on renewable energy
integration, and optimize virtual bidding decisions under the constraints of carbon metrics using
various optimization algorithms, we aim to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of these green
strategies.
35 Acknowledgments
This work was conducted as part of an internship at the Research Chair of AI for Supply Chain
at University of Quebec at Rimouski (UQAR) and VidensAnalytics. We gratefully acknowledge
the financial support provided by the research chair and VidensAnalytics which made this research
possible.
References
[1]CANTON, Helen. International energy agency—IEA. In : The Europa Directory of International Organi-
zations 2021. Routledge, 2021. p. 684-686.
[2]PAGLIA, Eric et PARKER, Charles. The intergovernmental panel on climate change: guardian of climate
science. Guardians of Public Value: How Public Organisations Become and Remain Institutions, 2021, p.
295-321.
[3]BALTAOGLU, Sevi, TONG, Lang, et ZHAO, Qing. Algorithmic bidding for virtual trading in electricity
markets. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2018, vol. 34, no 1, p. 535-543.
[4]PRETE, Chiara Lo, GUO, Nongchao, et SHANBHAG, Uday V . Virtual bidding and financial transmission
rights: An equilibrium model for cross-product manipulation in electricity markets. IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, 2018, vol. 34, no 2, p. 953-967.
[5]HADSELL, Lester et SHAWKY , Hany A. One-day forward premiums and the impact of virtual bidding
on the New York wholesale electricity market using hourly data. Journal of Futures Markets: Futures,
Options, and Other Derivative Products, 2007, vol. 27, no 11, p. 1107-1125.
[6]HADSELL, Lester. Day-ahead premiums on the New England ISO. The Electricity Journal, 2008, vol. 21,
no 4, p. 51-57.
[7]JHA, Akshaya et WOLAK, Frank A. Testing for market efficiency with transactions costs: An application
to convergence bidding in wholesale electricity markets. In : Industrial Organization Seminar, Yale
University. 2013.
[8]SDG, U. Sustainable development goals. The energy progress report. Tracking SDG, 2019, vol. 7, p.
805-814.
[9]World Economic Forum, The green energy economy is here - but it needs to grow bigger quicker, says the
IEA, ’https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/10/green-energy-economy-is-here-iea/’
[10] US Department of energy, New DOE Report Outlines Solutions to Meet Increasing Electricity Demand
and Cut Emissions , April 2024.
[11] World Investment Report 2024, Chapter III, Sustainable finance trends.
[12] Green Finance institute, ’https://www.greenfinanceinstitute.com/’.
[13] GIRALDO, Juan S. Welfare Impact of Virtual Trading on Wholesale Electricity Markets. 2017. Thèse de
doctorat. Purdue University.
[14] GALARNEAU-VINCENT, Rémi, GAUTHIER, Geneviève, et GODIN, Frédéric. Foreseeing the worst:
Forecasting electricity DART spikes. Energy Economics, 2023, vol. 119, p. 106521.
[15] NIZHARADZE, Nika, FAROKHI SOOFI, Arash, et MANSHADI, Saeed. Predicting the Gap in the
Day-Ahead and Real-Time Market Prices Leveraging Exogenous Weather Data. Algorithms, 2023, vol.
16, no 11, p. 508.
[16] LI, Youru, ZHU, Zhenfeng, KONG, Deqiang, et al. EA-LSTM: Evolutionary attention-based LSTM for
time series prediction. Knowledge-Based Systems, 2019, vol. 181, p. 104785.
[17] CHANG, Zihan, ZHANG, Yang, et CHEN, Wenbo. Effective adam-optimized LSTM neural network for
electricity price forecasting. In : 2018 IEEE 9th international conference on software engineering and
service science (ICSESS). IEEE, 2018. p. 245-248.
[18] HADSELL, Lester. The impact of virtual bidding on price volatility in New York’s wholesale electricity
market. Economics Letters, 2007, vol. 95, no 1, p. 66-72.
4[19] CELEBI, Metin, HAJOS, Attila, et HANSER, Philip Q. Virtual bidding: the good, the bad and the ugly.
The Electricity Journal, 2010, vol. 23, no 5, p. 16-25.
[20] Virtual Trading, New York Market Orientation Course (NYMOC) Webinar, Gina Elizabeth Craan Manager,
Market Training, NYISO.
[21] TANG, Wenyuan, RAJAGOPAL, Ram, POOLLA, Kameshwar, et al. Model and data analysis of two-
settlement electricity market with virtual bidding. In : 2016 IEEE 55th Conference on Decision and
Control (CDC). IEEE, 2016. p. 6645-6650.
[22] NYISO’s 2024 Priorities Are Fueling New York’s Clean Energy Future, February 5, 2024.
[23] NYISO Energy Market & Operational Data.
[24] Market Overview Introduction Gina E. Craan Manager, Market Training, NYISO.
[25] The New York Energy Grid, by the Numbers: A Power Trends Primer, June 4, 2019.
[26] Hannah Ritchie, Pablo Rosado and Max Roser (2020) - “CO emissions by fuel” OurWorldInData.org.
Retrieved from: ’https:/ourworldindata.org/emissions-by-fuel’.
[27] MCKNIGHT, Patrick E. et NAJAB, Julius. Mann-Whitney U Test. The Corsini encyclopedia of psychology,
2010, p. 1-1.
5