Submitted to Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 202 2. Surrogate Modeling for Methane Dispersion 
Simulatio ns Using Fourier Neural Operator  
 
 
Qie Zhang*              Mirco Milletari                 Yagna Oruganti                  Philipp Witte  
Microsoft                    Microsoft                          Microsoft                       Microsoft  
Abstract  
Methane leak detection and remediation are critical for tackling climate change, 
where methane dispersion simulation s play an important role in emission source 
attribution . As 3D modeling of methane dispersion is often costly and time -
consuming, we train a deep -learning -based surrogate model using  the Fourier 
Neural Operator to learn the PDE solver in our study. Our prel iminary result 
shows that our surrogate modeling provides a fast, accurate and cost -effective 
solution to methane dispersion simulation s, thus reducing the cycle time of 
methane leak detection.  
 
1 Introduction  
Methane (CH 4) is a potent greenhouse gas (GHG)  and the second largest contributor to global 
warming (next to CO₂). CH 4 lasts in the atmosphere for nearly a decade, which is much less time 
than CO₂. However, it absorbs energy much more effectively than CO₂. Methane’s severe impact on 
Earth’s warmi ng is reflected in its value of Global Warming Potential (GWP) , an index for 
comparisons of the global warming impacts of different gases. Methane is estimated to have a GWP 
of 84–87 over 20 years  [1]. This highlights the importance of methane remediation  for tackling 
climate change.  
The global oil and gas industry is one of the primary sources of methane emissions. From its 
operations , around 70% of today’s methane emissions are technically possible to be avoided, 
according to  the International Energy Agen cy (IEA) ’s estimate  [2]. This speaks of the strong 
motivation of leveraging methane detection technologies to mitigate emissions. E merging methane -
sensing technologies  developed for this purpose includ e satellites, aerial surveys  and IoT sensors , 
among others. For example, ground sensor grids can provide real -time/near real -time measurements 
of methane concentration over an area, in order to track emission sources and leak rates  [3, 4] . This 
is an inverse problem whose corresponding forward process  is methane dispersion modeling, that 
is, computing the downstream pollutant concentration given source leak locations and rates, together 
with meteorological variables.  
The methane dispersion modeling or simulation belongs to the category of atmospheric d ispersion 
modeling where a combination of advection (due to the wind)  and diffusion (due to turbulent eddy 
motion) occurs in the air near surface. It is governed by the 3D advection -diffusion equation  which 
is a 2nd order Partial Differential Equation (PDE ) [5]. The forward modeling of methane dispersion 
is the most computationally expensive component of a non -linear Bayesian regression approach for 
methane source attribution, where Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)  simulations based on the 
3D advection -diffu sion PDE need to be performed numerous times (e.g., thousands)  [4]. As the 3D 
dispersion modeling is costly and time -consuming, we will investigate a deep -learning -based proxy 
model to speed up the modeling by a few orders of magnitude. To be more specific , we will evaluate 
the Fourier Neural Operator  (FNO)  [6], a state -of-the-art approach for expediting our PDE -based 
modeling of methane dispersion.  
2 Methodology   
 
 2 2.1 Deep learning for PDEs  
Recently we have seen the emergence of a new way of utiliz ing deep learning to provide faster AI  
surrogate  models for physics -based numerical simulation or optimization problems. Those scientific 
simulations usually involve solving complex PDEs, where conv entional numerical solvers typically 
require fine discretization (e.g., in space and time) to achieve accurate solutions. Therefore, 
conventional PDE solvers can often be computationally expensive and time -consuming, especially 
for a large -scale problem. T o address the cost and speed challenge, innovative AI -based emulators 
are brought up to learn the solution operators of parametric PDEs. One category of approaches is to 
take advantage of the physics constraints defined in PDEs, such as Physics Informed Ne ural 
Network (PINN), where the underlying PDE formulation is coded in the loss function to train a deep 
learning model  [7]. Another category is data -driven without using physics constraints. Among this 
category, a recent novel method named Fourier Neural O perator ( FNO ) shows great efficiency and 
state-of-the-art performance in directly approximating PDE operators  [6]. The success of the FNO 
in learning highly non -linear and complex PDE operators relies on its spectral convolution in the 
Fourier domain, as spectral methods are widely used for deriving PDE solutions . 
In this study, we will build a proxy FNO model for the methane dispersion PDE and validate its 
performance by comparing the FNO predictions to the traditional numerical solutions. We will 
experime nt with some modifications of the FNO architecture and check their relative performance  
in future work . A high -speed and accurate AI -based simulator would dramatically expedite methane 
dispersion simulation s, leading to a fast and cost -effective workflow o f emission source attribution 
and sensor placement optimization.  
Another contribution to emphasize in our study is that our methane dispersion modeling belongs to 
a more challenging class of PDEs whose solution operator appears more complex for an AI model  
to learn. In Li et al.’s FNO examples  [6], the inputs to PDEs are static or not varying over time. 
However, we have time -variant  input arguments to the methane dispersion PDE, such as the wind 
direction and speed. A rapid change in the wind condition can result in  a dramatic change of methane 
concentration distribution in a non -smooth fashion and a short amount of time. Non-smooth  
temporal variation s in inputs and outputs pose a big challenge for deriving a surrogate model . 
2.2 Surrogate modeling using FNO  
The governing PDE for the methane dispersion simulation is a 3D advection -diffusion equation  [5]: 
𝜕𝐶
𝜕𝑡+∇∙(𝐶𝑣⃗)=∇∙(𝐷∇𝐶)+𝑆 
Where 𝐶(𝑥,𝑡) is the methane concentration field at location  𝑥 and time 𝑡, a variable of interest to 
be solved. The term 𝑣⃗(𝑥,𝑡) is the wind velocity field that methane is moving with. 𝑆 describes 
methane leak sources and 𝐷 is the diffusion coefficient matrix.  
We use the above methane dispersion PDE , together with a conventional physics -based approach,  
to generate 1000 pairs of input and output data in our preliminary experiment. The inputs consist of 
the methane leak rate, wind direction, wind speed, atmospheric stability class, temperature, and 
pressure. The output data is the 3D methane concentration field as a function of time. Each 
simulation sample  is performed in a time length of one day with one hour  as a time -step. Therefore, 
our input and output data for surrogate modeling is 4D, in the form of (x, y, z, t) w here nt = 24. The 
most impactful inputs are methane leak rate, wind direction and wind speed , and we consider only 
those three for our proof -of-concept surrogate modeling . Hence, we use a channel number  of 3 to 
provide those 3 variables  in our input data.  Our output data has only one variable (methane 
concentration) , so the  channel number of output data is 1. All 1000 samples of the leak rate, wind 
direction and wind speed are randomly populated for training data generation. The wind direction 
and speed var y hour by hour, but the methane leak rate is kept constant within a day for now. In our 
preliminary surrogate model, we only consider one methane emission source, at the center of our 
3D model with a fixed elevation.   
 
 3 Once we obtain our training samples, we  feed them to the FNO algorithm to train a surrogate model 
for our dispersion PDE  operator . The original FNO architecture consists of 3 main components: (1) 
a time -domain encoder with Fully Connected (FC) layers to lift the channel dimension; (2) A series 
of repeatable Fourier layers combining Fourier -domain spectral convolution and time -domain 1x1 
convolution; (3) a time -domain decoder with FC layers to project back to the target dimension. Our 
data size for 3D methane dispersion simulation s over time is ( nx, ny, nz, nt) = (57, 58, 40, 24) , and 
4D FFT and inverse FFT over those four dimensions are performed in  the FNO. We also take 
advantage of distributed training using DeepSpeed [8] to expedite our training with 8 GPUs. Once 
a surrogate model is derived, we can predict the 3D methane concentration field at all 24 time -steps 
in a single pass of inference  which takes less than a second . 
2.3 Cloud HPC for training data generation  
After our preliminary experiment, we would like to generate thousands more training data with the 
conventional physics -based solution to build a generalized and robust FNO surrogate model. This 
can be computationally intensive, and we rely on the cloud -native HPC technology for distributed 
3D simulations. We use a combination of Dask and Kubernetes [9] for running methane dispersion 
modeling in a containerized fashion on cloud, which provides great features such as scalability, 
fault-tolerance, and auto -scaling. It can also take advantage of the spot virtual machines to 
significantly reduce the computational cost (up to 90%).  
3 Preliminary results  
We split our 1000 training samples  into training (800 samples) and test (200 samples) datasets. We 
train a FNO pro xy model with the 800 training samples using an Adam optimizer and a relative 
MSE loss function  [6]. After a few hundred epochs, both training and testing losses are reduced to 
a few percent (relative to the ground truth). We run inference on test samples (unseen  by training) 
and plot one sample result in the figure below. Displayed are 3D methane dispersion plumes from 
our FNO inference and the conventional physics -based solution at various time steps. Although the 
time-variant  wind causes rapid changes in  the plume orientation and shape, our FNO surrogate 
model is capable of learning the complex non -linear PDE operator very accurately, producing high -
fidelity simulation results at all time steps in one pass of inference.  
 
4 Conclusion  
We have develop ed a preliminary  surrogate model based on  the FNO for methane dispersion 
modeling . The initial result shows that it emulate s the highly non -linear PDE solver from the 3D 
advection -diffusion equation very well, producing accurate simulation results comparing to the 
conventional physics -based  solution.  Our FNO surrogate modeling is also capable of handling  the 
time-variant inputs  and temporally non-smooth outputs . The FNO model provides a fast and 
accurate alterna tive solution to methane dispersion simulation s, thus reducing the cycle time for 
emission source attribution and qua ntification.  
 
 
 4 References  
[1] de Coninck, H., Revi, A., Babiker, M., Bertoldi, P., Buckeridge, M., Cartwright, A., Dong, W., Ford, 
J., Fuss, S., Hourcade, J. C., Ley, D., Mechler, R., Newman, P., Revokatova, A., Schultz, S., Steg, L., & 
Sugiyama, T. (2018) . Strengthening and Implementi ng the Global Response. In Global warming of 
1.5°C: Summary for policy makers (pp. 313 -443). IPCC - The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change.  
[2] IEA: Driving down methane leaks from the oil and gas industry – technology report (Jan 2021), 
https://www .iea.org/reports/driving -down -methane -leaks -from -the-oil-and-gas-industry  
[3] Wang, S., Malvar, S., Nunes, L., Whitehall, K., Oruganti, Y.D., Alaudah, Y., Badam, A.  (2021) . 
Unsupervised machine learning framework for sensor placement optimization: analyzing methane leaks. 
In NeurIPS 2021  Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Mac hine Learning.  
[4] Milletari , M., Malvar , S., Oruganti , Y., Nunes , L., Alaudah , Y., Badam , Y., (2022). Source Attribution 
and Emissions Quantification for Methane Leak Detection: A Non -Linear Bayesian Regression 
Approach . In The 8th International Online & Onsite Conference on Machine Learning, Optimization, 
and Data Science . 
[5] García, J.G., Ho sseini, B. & Stockie, J.M. (2021). Simultaneous Model Calibration and Source 
Inversion . In Atmospheric Dispersion Models. Pure Appl. Geophys . 
[6] Zongyi Li, Nikola B. Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede  Liu, Kaushik Bhattacharya, 
Andrew M. Stuart, Anima Anandkumar  (2020) . Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial 
Differential Equations. In arXiv:2010.08895  
[7] Raissi, Maziar, Paris Perdikaris, and George E. Karniadakis. (2019) . "Physics -informed neu ral 
networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear 
partial differential equations." Journal of Computational Physics . 
[8] https://www.deepspeed.ai/ ; https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed  
[9] Qie Zhang, George Iordanescu, Wee Hyong Tok, Sverre Brandsberg -Dahl, Hari Krishnan Srinivasan, 
Ranveer Chandra, Navjot Kukreja, and Gerard Gorman, (2021). Hyperwavve: A cloud -native solution 
for hyperscale seismic im aging on Azure . In 2021 First International Meeting for Applied Geoscience 
& Energy Expanded Abstracts . 