Hierarchical Classification for Automated Image
Annotation of Coral Reef Benthic Structures
Célia Blondin1, Joris Guérin1, Kelly Inagaki2, Guilherme Longo2& Laure Berti-Équille1
1Espace-Dev, IRD, Univ. Montpellier, Montpellier, France
2Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, Brazil
Correspondance: celia.blondin@ird.fr ,joris.guerin@ird.fr
Abstract
Automated benthic image annotation is crucial to efficiently monitor and protect
coral reefs against climate change. Current machine learning approaches fail
to capture the hierarchical nature of benthic organisms covering reef substrata,
i.e., coral taxonomic levels and health condition. To address this limitation, we
propose to annotate benthic images using hierarchical classification. Experiments
on a custom dataset from a Northeast Brazilian coral reef show that our approach
outperforms flat classifiers, improving both F1 and hierarchical F1 scores by
approximately 2% across varying amounts of training data. In addition, this
hierarchical method aligns more closely with ecological objectives.
1 Introduction
Coral reefs host around 25% of global marine species [ 1] and provide vital ecosystem services
for coastal populations, including maintaining fish stocks, protecting shorelines from waves, and
fostering tourism [ 2]. Despite their importance, these ecosystems are facing unprecedented threats
from climate change [ 3] as illustrated by the increasing frequency of coral bleaching events [ 4].
In response to these challenges, comprehensive coral reef surveying and monitoring have become
essential for implementing appropriate and timely conservation actions [5].
Benthic monitoring focuses on measuring seafloor coverage by various organisms, especially
corals [ 6]. Over the past decades, monitoring programs have shifted from direct underwater measure-
ments to photographic methods [ 7], creating lasting records and significantly reducing underwater
time. Traditionally, collected images were annotated manually using specialized software, involving
sampling random points and labeling them with their benthic categories (Figure 1). These annotations
serve to calculate cover proportions, which are essential for coral monitoring.
However, manual annotation is time-consuming, which can delay the availability of survey results, and
can introduce bias due to differences between analysts [ 8]. To address this, platforms like CoralNet [ 9]
use deep learning for automatic annotation [ 10]. Small pixel patches (typically 224x224) are extracted
around each point and the problem of point annotation is addressed as an image classification task
(Figure 1). This way, ecologists only need to manually annotate a small subset of images, which are
used to train a neural network capable of automatically annotating the remaining images.
During our collaboration between data scientists and marine ecologists, we identified a misalignment
between Machine Learning (ML) approaches and ecological needs. Current models use detailed
labels encompassing various taxonomic levels and coral health status. For instance, a point labeled
as “Bleached Palythoa" simultaneously conveys information about coral type, genus, and health
status (Figure 2). However, in practice, ecologists often need to aggregate these labels differently to
compute cover proportions of macro groups, e.g., grouping all corals regardless of species or health.
Flat classification presents challenges for underrepresented categories, which often lack sufficient
labeled data for accurate classification at such a high level of detail. To address this issue, we
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2024.Figure 1: Benthic image annotation process – A predetermined number of random points are
sampled within a fixed area and annotated with the corresponding organism or substrate. The relative
frequencies are used as proxies for cover proportions of benthic categories within the sampled area.
investigate the application of Hierarchical Classification (HC) [ 11] to benthic image annotation,
a novel approach in this field. This multi-level prediction strategy has the potential to improve
performance by allowing partially correct predictions. Furthermore, we argue that evaluating model
performance with hierarchical metrics [ 12] would more accurately reflect real-world ecological
practices. By aligning our approach with the inherent hierarchical structure of benthic organisms, we
aim to enhance both the performance and ecological relevance of automated coral reef monitoring.
2 Methodology
Hierarchical Classification (HC) consists in organizing classes into a hierarchy, represented as a
tree [ 13,11] (Figure 2). This structure reflects the natural relationships between classes, with general
categories at higher levels and specific subcategories at lower levels. Two main approaches exist:
local approaches, often called “top-down", train separate classifiers for each node of the hierarchy,
while global approaches build a single, comprehensive model considering the entire hierarchy
simultaneously. In this paper, we evaluate the potential of top-down HC for benthic image annotation.
2.1 Building the Hierachy
Implementing HC for coral images requires a paradigm shift in how the label set is designed. Marine
ecologists must establish a classification tree representing the taxonomic hierarchy, rather than a flat
set of labels. Building an HC tree requires answering several design questions: Can a prediction
be composed of multiple labels? Can multiple path lead to the same label? Can predictions stop at
intermediate nodes? As the goal of this work is to validate the relevance of HC for benthic image
annotation, we choose the most simple tree design possible where the final prediction is always a
single leaf node, and there is only one path to each label. The tree (Appendix A) was designed in a
collaboration between an ML expert and a marine ecologist to ensure both computational constraints
and biological relevance are respected. While this initial step represents an additional effort, it helps
aligning the annotation process with biological classification principles and facilitates subsequent
ecological analyses involving grouping labels at various taxonomic levels.
2.2 Hierarchical Classifier
The first step to annotate an image is to extract 224x224 patches around the annotation points. Each
patch is passed through the CoralNet backbone, an EfficientNet B0 pre-trained on 16 million benthic
images [ 10], to extract features. Then, a top-down hierarchical classifier is implemented. We use the
hiclass library [ 14] and train a Local Classifier per Parent Node approach. This approach consist of
using an independent classifier for each non-leaf node. In our case, we use MLPs with two hidden
layers (200 and 100 neurons) as the individual node classifiers.
2Figure 2: Hierarchical structure of benthic labels – This conceptual diagram illustrates the multi-
level categories used for classifying benthic organisms and substrates in coral reef ecosystems.
3 Experiments
This section presents the experiments conducted to assess the potential of HC for benthic image
annotation. We provide a detailed Github repository to reproduce our results1.
3.1 Experimental Setup
3.1.1 Dataset
For the experiments, we used a custom dataset, collected and annotated by the Marine Ecology
Laboratory/UFRN, at Rio do Fogo, Northeast Brazil. Between 2017 and 2022, 100 images were
collected from 2 sites every 3 months. We utilized a subset of 1,549 images, each annotated with 25
random points, resulting in 38,725 annotations. The dataset contains 54 distinct labels, which are
highly imbalanced – 11 labels account for 95% of the annotations, while 24 classes count less than
20 annotations. The distribution of annotate patches is detailed in Appendix B. We created a test set
by randomly selecting 10% of the dataset, maintaining the overall class distribution. Test patches
were chosen independently, without considering image-level coherence.
3.1.2 Baseline
Current approaches typically train a flat classifier with a large set of labels corresponding to all leaf
nodes [ 10]. Ecologists can subsequently group these labels to calculate the cover of super-classes,
such as “all corals" [ 15]. This post-hoc grouping task can be viewed as “bottom-up" hierarchical
classification. In this work, we compare a traditional bottom-up approach – MLP with 2 hidden layers
(200, 100) – against the proposed top-down approach, which considers the hierarchy during training.
3.1.3 Evaluation Metrics
Traditional benthic image annotation approaches employ standard classification metrics (e.g., ac-
curacy, precision, recall, F1-score), evaluating a model’s ability to make perfect predictions across
all taxonomic levels. However, considering the hierarchical nature of benthic classifications, not
all misclassifications have equal ecological significance. For instance, misclassifying a Bleached
Palythoa as a non-bleached Palythoa has less impact on derived ecological metrics than misclassifying
it as Algae. The former error affects only leaf-node accuracy, while the latter affects cover estimates
at all levels. To address this nuance, we use Hierarchical Classification (HC) metrics [ 12], which
account for the varying severity of classification errors based on their position in the hierarchy. In
our study, we compare top-down and bottom-up approaches using both the traditional F1-score
(F1) and the hierarchical F1-score (hF1). This dual evaluation allows us to assess the impact of
incorporating hierarchical information during training on both perfect label prediction and partially
accurate predictions. By doing so, we aim to provide a more comprehensive evaluation that aligns
with the hierarchical nature of benthic classification and its ecological implications.
3(a) F1-score
 (b) Hierarchical F1-score
Figure 3: Experimental results – Comparison of flat and hierarchical classifiers for our custom
benthic image annotation dataset, showing performance metrics across varying training data sizes.
Error bars indicate standard deviation from random training set sampling.
3.2 Results
Our experimental results are displayed in Figure 3, where we compare the F1-score and hierarchical
F1-score for the flat and hierarchical classifiers when the number of training patches increases. It
shows that the hierarchical classifier always outperforms the flat classifier, with performance gains
ranging from 1% (for small training sets) to 2% (for larger sets).
Interestingly, the performance gap between the two approaches remains similar for the hierarchical
F1-score, contrary to our expectation that this metric would more severely penalize errors early in the
tree structure for the flat classifier. This suggests that the flat classifier may implicitly capture some of
the hierarchical relationships between classes. If the flat classifier were making largely implausible
errors, we would expect a more substantial difference in the hierarchical F1-score.
4 Conclusion
In this work, we investigated the potential benefits of using hierarchical classification for benthic
image annotation. Our experimental results indicate that HC outperforms traditional flat classifiers
across both flat and hierarchical metrics. However, the flat classifier is more robust than anticipated
to hierarchical F1-score, possibly due to its ability to learn some inherent class relationships. Further
investigation into the specific types of errors made by each classifier could provide additional insights
into their respective strengths and limitations.
To gain a deeper understanding of the performance of HC for benthic image annotation, we plan to
apply this methodology to other datasets to contextualize these results and assess their significance.
For instance, the Moorea Labeled Corals dataset [16] contains a larger number of annotations and a
simpler hierarchical structure, which could provide additional insights.
Although building the tree represents an additional effort, it enables better consideration of the labels
used, avoids overlapping categories or unnecessary labels, and facilitates subsequent ecological
analyses, which often involve grouping labels at various taxonomic levels. To alleviate the workload
of tree construction, a promising research direction to improve our approach is to investigate how
this process can be automated and refined to enhance class discrimination [ 17]. Additionally,
exploring alternative hierarchical classification methods, such as global HC, could represent a
valuable contribution.
Finally, while our results demonstrate the potential of HC, the modest performance gains ( 2%) neces-
sitate careful consideration of the trade-off between improved accuracy and increased computational
costs associated with training and inferring with multiple classifiers in a hierarchical setups. This
balance will be crucial in determining the applicability of HC in benthic image annotation tasks.
1https://github.com/celia-bl/hierarchical_classifying_corals_dataset.git
4References
[1]D. Souter, S. Planes, J. Wicquart, M. Logan, D. Obura, and F. Staub, “Status of Coral Reefs
of the World: 2020,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://gcrmn.net/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/
Executive-Summary-with-Forewords.pdf
[2]A. J. Woodhead, C. C. Hicks, A. V . Norström, G. J. Williams, and N. A. Graham, “Coral reef ecosystem
services in the anthropocene,” Functional Ecology , vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1023–1034, 2019.
[3]M. D. Spalding and B. E. Brown, “Warm-water coral reefs and climate change,” Science , vol. 350, no.
6262, pp. 769–771, 2015.
[4]C. M. Eakin, H. P. A. Sweatman, and R. E. Brainard, “The 2014–2017 global-scale coral bleaching
event: insights and impacts,” Coral Reefs , vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 539–545, Aug. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00338-019-01844-2
[5]G. J. Edgar and R. D. Stuart-Smith, “Systematic global assessment of reef fish communities by the reef life
survey program,” Scientific Data , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2014.
[6]G. De’Ath, K. E. Fabricius, H. Sweatman, and M. Puotinen, “The 27–year decline of coral cover on the
great barrier reef and its causes,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 109, no. 44, pp.
17 995–17 999, 2012.
[7]P. L. Jokiel, K. S. Rodgers, E. K. Brown, J. C. Kenyon, G. Aeby, W. R. Smith, and F. Farrell, “Comparison
of methods used to estimate coral cover in the hawaiian islands,” PeerJ , vol. 3, p. e954, 2015.
[8]O. Beijbom, P. J. Edmunds, C. Roelfsema, J. Smith, D. I. Kline, B. P. Neal, M. J. Dunlap, V . Moriarty,
T.-Y . Fan, C.-J. Tan et al. , “Towards automated annotation of benthic survey images: Variability of human
experts and operational modes of automation,” PloS one , vol. 10, no. 7, p. e0130312, 2015.
[9]I. D. Williams, C. S. Couch, O. Beijbom, T. A. Oliver, B. Vargas-Angel, B. D. Schumacher, and R. E.
Brainard, “Leveraging automated image analysis tools to transform our capacity to assess status and trends
of coral reefs,” Frontiers in Marine Science , vol. 6, p. 222, 2019.
[10] Q. Chen, O. Beijbom, S. Chan, J. Bouwmeester, and D. Kriegman, “A new deep learning engine for
coralnet,” in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , 2021, pp. 3693–3702.
[11] C. N. Silla and A. A. Freitas, “A survey of hierarchical classification across different application domains,”
Data mining and knowledge discovery , vol. 22, pp. 31–72, 2011.
[12] A. Kosmopoulos, I. Partalas, E. Gaussier, G. Paliouras, and I. Androutsopoulos, “Evaluation measures for
hierarchical classification: a unified view and novel approaches,” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery ,
vol. 29, pp. 820–865, 2015.
[13] J. Wehrmann, R. Cerri, and R. Barros, “Hierarchical multi-label classification networks,” in International
conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2018, pp. 5075–5084.
[14] F. M. Miranda, N. Köhnecke, and B. Y . Renard, “HiClass: a Python Library for Local Hierarchical
Classification Compatible with Scikit-learn,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 24, no. 29, pp.
1–17, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://jmlr.org/papers/v24/21-1518.html
[15] A. W. Aued, F. Smith, J. P. Quimbayo, D. V . Candido, G. O. Longo, C. E. Ferreira, J. D. Witman, S. R.
Floeter, and B. Segal, “Large-scale patterns of benthic marine communities in the brazilian province,” PloS
one, vol. 13, no. 6, p. e0198452, 2018.
[16] Moorea Coral Reef LTER and P. Edmunds, “MCR LTER: Coral Reef: Computer Vision: Moorea
Labeled Corals,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://portal.edirepository.org/nis/mapbrowse?packageid=
knb-lter-mcr.5006.3
[17] N. Srivastava and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Discriminative Transfer Learning with Tree-based Priors,”
inAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 26, 2013. [Online]. Available:
https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2013/hash/9ac403da7947a183884c18a67d3aa8de-Abstract.html
5A Hierarchical Tree
Root
Algae
Non Calcified
Caulerpa
CaulerpaCaulerpaCaulerpa Cupressoides PterocladiellaGelidiaceae
Gelidium spp.Gelidiella spp.WrangeliaCladophora spp.Dictyopteris
Dictyota MertensiiDictyopteris spp.Dictyopteris PlagiogrammaDictyopteris DelicatulaDictyopteris Jamaicensis
Macroalgae: FilamentousHypnea MusciformisLeathery Macrophytes: OtherCodiumDictyota
Dictyota CiliolataDictyota MenstrualisDictyota spp.Dictyota spp.Canistrocarpus Cervicornis
SargassumValonia VentricosaLaurencia spp.Turf
Turf FilamenteousTurf and sandCalcareous Turf
CalcifiedAmphiroa spp.Macroalgae:Articulated calcareousCalcifying calcareous crustose algae: DHC
FishRockOther invertebrates
AscidianAnemoneSponges
SpongePlacospongiaEncrusting spongeUnknownCyanobacteria
Cyanobacteria filmsCyanobacteriaSubstrates
Unconsolidated (soft)SandShadowCorals
Soft
Zoanthidae
Palythoa spp.
Palythoa CaribaeorumPalythoa spp.Protopalythoa VariabilisZoanthus spp.
Zoanthus spp.Zoanthus SociatusOctocoral Plexauridae
Plexaurella GrandifloraPlexaura spp.Hydro-corals MilleporaMillepora spp.Millepora AlcicornisBleached
Bleached Hard CoralSoft Coral BleachedBleached Coral PointDead CoralRecent Dead CoralHard
Favia
Favia GravidaFavia LeptophyllaPorites Porites AstreoidesSiderastrea
Siderastrea spp.Siderastrea StellataTubastrea TubastreaMussimila MussimilaAgaricia
Agaricia FragilisAgaricia Humilis
6B Class Distribution
Figure 4: Number of patches corresponding to each leaf node present in our custom benthic image
annotation dataset.
7