Enhancing Stratospheric Weather Analyses and Forecasts
by Deploying Sensors from a Weather Balloon
Kiwan Maeng1 2Iskender Kushan3Brandon Lucia1Ashish Kapoor3
Abstract
The ability to analyze and forecast stratospheric
weather conditions is fundamental to addressing
climate change. However, our capacity to col-
lect data in the stratosphere is limited by sparsely
deployed weather balloons. We propose a frame-
work to collect stratospheric data by releasing a
contrail of tiny sensor devices as a weather bal-
loon ascends. The key machine learning chal-
lenges are determining when and how to deploy
a ﬁnite collection of sensors to produce a useful
data set. We decide when to release sensors by
modeling the deviation of a forecast from actual
stratospheric conditions as a Gaussian process.
We then implement a novel hardware system that
is capable of optimally releasing sensors from a
rising weather balloon. We show that this data
engineering framework is effective through real
weather balloon ﬂights, as well as simulations.
1. Introduction
The availability of timely, representative data sets of strato-
spheric measurements is a key requirement for tackling
climate change with machine learning. However, the mea-
surement data are extremely sparse because sensing and
data collection in the stratosphere is difﬁcult and expensive.
The stratosphere is very sparsely sensed. The stratosphere
lies approximately between 10 km and 50 km above Earth’s
surface. Important atmospheric phenomenon such as jet
streams, planetary waves, El N ~ino, solar cycles and dy-
namic equilibrium of ozone have a stratospheric component.
Climate science beneﬁts from better stratospheric sensing.
Most stratospheric weather data are indirectly sensed by
satellites, producing less useful data than a direct measure-
ment. Remote data require calibration using direct measure-
ments to be used in weather models and are unavailable
1Carnegie Mellon University2Work done while intern at Mi-
crosoft3Microsoft Corporation. Correspondence to: Ashish
Kapoor <akapoor@microsoft.com >.
Figure 1. (Left) Releasing sensors (minisondes) from the balloon
enhances the measurements by widening the coverage in space and
time. (Right) Data from real-world studies showing GPS tracks of
the balloon (blue), and the deployed sensors (green, orange).
in many regions, e.g., regions covered with snow (Ingleby
et al., 2016). Aircraft can directly measure the lower strato-
sphere; however, only a weather balloon can directly mea-
sure the upper stratosphere (Ingleby et al., 2016).
Sensor-equipped weather balloons are fundamental to
weather forecasting and stratospheric weather model-
ing (Dabberdt et al., 2003; Flores et al., 2013), but balloons
currently produce little data. Each weather balloon carries a
radiosonde , which is a package of sensors and radios that
measures and transmits atmospheric temperature, pressure,
relative humidity, wind speed, and wind direction (Dab-
berdt et al., 2003; Flores et al., 2013). Each radiosonde
captures and records very little data. A balloon ﬂight lasts
around two hours, only during which measurements can
occur (Dabberdt et al., 2003). Mission scarcity exacerbates
data scarcity: there are only around 800 radiosonde stations
worldwide, each launching balloons at most twice a day (In-
gleby et al., 2016; Dabberdt et al., 2003). Recently, many
stations across Asia and South America have scaled back to
one launch per day (Durre et al., 2006; NOAA, 2019b).
We propose a framework using machine learning and multi-
ple sensors that aims to increase the measurement efﬁciency
of weather balloons. The key idea is to drop additional sen-
sors, or minisondes , from the balloon throughout the ﬂight
such that the combined measurements provide maximum
information with respect to the weather modeling.
The minisondes can provide richer information locally
around their release altitudes by sampling at a higher rate
and by lingering longer due to their light-weight character-
istics. Given that there are a limited number of minisondesEnhancing Stratospheric Weather Analyses and Forecasts by Deploying Sensors from a Weather Balloon
Minisondes
2 x AAA 
BatteryPower System 
CircuitryMCU
(Teensy 3.2)
Temp / Pres Sensor 
(BMP388)GPS
(SAM -M8Q) LoRa Module
(RFM96W)LoRa Module
(RFM95W)Temp / 
Pres 
Sensor 
(BMP388)
6 x AA 
BatteryPower System 
CircuitryMCU
(ATmega 32u4)GPS
(ZOE -M8Q)
Raspberry
Pi 3
Iridium Module
(RockBlock
9603)Minisondes Main Balloon
To ServerRelease 
Mechanism
Data Path
Release Control
Figure 2. (Left) Photo of the main payload and the minisondes. Parachute and the balloon for the main payload are not attached. (Right)
Block diagrams describing the hardware design of the balloon and the minisondes.
that can be deployed, we need decision-making mechanisms
that balance the trade-off between the sensing requirements
and the number of minisondes available.
The machine learning questions center around the goal of
(1) characterizing value-of-deployment (VOD) of the min-
isondes, which is the utility of deploying a minisonde at an
altitude given all the information at hand, (2) maximizing
that utility using the limited number of minisondes that can
be carried, and (3) incorporating the new measurements in
weather forecast models. We characterize the VOD in terms
ofsurprise that the weather balloon experiences as it rises
through the air. Intuitively, we deﬁne surprise as the devi-
ation between forecast and reality and use it as a signal to
determine how useful it will be to deploy a minisonde. The
VOD together with the information of the other minisondes
already deployed is used to determine the release altitudes.
Gaussian process models are then used to reﬁne the forecast
models with the newly sensed information. We demonstrate
the efﬁcacy of the framework via both simulations and real-
world ﬁeld studies where we launch actual weather balloons.
In summary, our contributions include:
Innovations in hardware, where we design, build and
demonstrate weather balloon payloads that can deploy
additional sensors (minisondes) as the balloon rises.
Characterization of value-of-deployment via modeling
surprise in weather forecasting.
Scheduling sequential deployment of sensors that con-
siders both the value-of-deployment and the budget.
Experiments in simulation and real-world that show
the advantages of the framework.
2. The Proposed Framework
System design: Figure 2 (left) shows the photo of the pay-
load with minisondes in auxiliary chambers that would be
released as the balloon rises up. Figure 2 (right) summarizes
our design of a weather balloon that drops minisondes at the
desired altitude and gathers additional data.The main balloon payload consists of a Raspberry Pi 3 as
a computing unit, various on-board sensors, communica-
tion modules to communicate with the minisondes and the
ground station, and a release mechanism to deploy the min-
isondes. The Raspberry Pi collects data and decides when
to release the minisondes. Each minisonde is initially inside
a chamber whose door is tied using ﬁshing wire. When the
Raspberry Pi decides the drop a minisonde, it passes current
through a ﬁlament, which burns the ﬁshing wire and opens
the chamber holding the sensor. The main balloon aggre-
gates the data the minisondes send while descending with
its own sensor readings, and sends the data to the ground
using an Iridium satellite communication channel. The main
payload runs off of 6 AA batteries. When the balloon bursts,
a parachute delivers the main payload to the ground at 5m/s.
The minisondes consist of a microcontroller unit (MCU),
various on-board sensors, and a LoRa communication mod-
ule. After being released, the attached parachute automat-
ically opens and the minisonde descends at 3 m/s. While
descending, the MCU periodically polls the sensors and
transmits the data to the main balloon using LoRa radio.
The minisondes are equipped with a custom dipole antenna
made with a ﬁberglass rod and copper tape, enabling a LoRa
range of more than 30km. The minisondes are powered with
two AAA batteries. Our initial ﬁeld experiments carried
two minisondes, which can be scaled up with more budget.
Deciding when to drop: Dropping a minisonde is most use-
ful when the measured data provide maximal information
about the climate. Since weather forecasts are a compact
representation of what we already know, the deviation of
real measurement from the forecast, or a surprise , is a good
surrogate to characterize the usefulness of dropping a min-
isonde. We deﬁne a surprise as the normalized L2 norm
between the predicted wind data and the observed wind
data:jj^u ujj=jj^ujj, where ^uanduare forecast and true
wind vectors respectively. Since it is impossible to collect
real-data to build a surprise model, we use simulation data.Enhancing Stratospheric Weather Analyses and Forecasts by Deploying Sensors from a Weather Balloon
Table 1: Forecast RMS error (NOAA vs reﬁned)
Launch 1 Original Reﬁned
Wind X-direction 4.71 3.17
Wind Y-direction 2.26 1.70
Pressure 14.30 5.80
Launch 2 Original Reﬁned
Wind X-direction 6.63 6.26
Wind Y-direction 2.08 1.85
Pressure 21.17 11.74
Figure 3. Evaluation results highlighting that: (Left) the GP model can very well predict the amount of surprise that will be encountered at
a given altitude. (Middle-left and middle-right) Results from real-world tests indicating that reﬁned wind models are better at predicting
the trajectory of the balloon. (Right) Table 1 shows that the root mean square (RMS) error in forecasting the winds and the pressure is
much lower with the reﬁned model when compared to the original NOAA model.
We ﬁrst created a simulator that uses forecasts released
by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) (NOAA, 2019a). The trajectories are synthesized
assuming a ﬁxed ascent rate (Spaceﬂight, 2009) and that the
balloon drifts horizontally with the same speed and direction
as the wind predictions until it reaches a burst altitude. We
then generate training data for the surprise model by using
the forecast from 6 hours ago as the prediction and the cur-
rent forecast as the true observation. The intuition is that the
places where the forecast changed the most contain the most
potential for surprise. We then use a Gaussian process with
RBF kernels with four-dimensional input features (altitude,
2-D wind vector, and pressure) to predict the surprise.
This model of the surprise then can help us make decisions
about the release schedule of the minisonde. First, we simu-
late the trajectory of the balloon and predict surprise along
that ﬂight path ofﬂine. Then, we equally divide the alti-
tude into bands and select the altitude along the ﬂight path
that corresponds to the maximal surprise in each band as
an altitude to release the minisondes. It is also feasible to
learn an online deployment policy, which we defer to future
work. Once the minisondes transmit the observed data, the
next challenge entails reﬁning the NOAA forecasts. We use
Gaussian processes, with latitude, longitude, and altitude
as inputs and the forecast variables as multi-dimensional
output, similarly to prior work (Kapoor et al., 2014).
3. Evaluation and Results
We conducted experiments in both simulation and the real-
world to study the usefulness of the approach. First, we
simulated a balloon ﬂight every hour for a period of 10 con-
secutive days. 50% of simulated ﬂights were used to create
the surprise model, and the rest were used as a test set. Fig-
ure 3 (left) shows a scatter plot between the predictions and
the ground truth from the simulation. The predictions and
the ground truth are highly correlated (0.82), highlighting
that it is possible to effectively characterize surprise.Next, we report evaluations on two real-world ﬂight tests
where two minisondes were dropped from a weather balloon
in each ﬂight. The balloons were conﬁgured so that the
ascent rate would be around 5 m/s, with a rupture altitude of
30 km, totaling around 2 hours of ﬂight time. For the ﬁrst
launch, the minisondes were programmed to be dropped at
altitudes of 5 km and 10 km, while for the second launch
the surprise model was used to determine the drop altitude
of 8.3 km and 23.6 km. Both the sensors were deployed
successfully for the ﬁrst launch, while for the second launch
only the ﬁrst was successful.
We then generated reﬁned forecast models using the min-
isonde data and tested if the newer models were better than
the original. Speciﬁcally, we used the NOAA forecasts and
the new forecast to predict the main balloon trajectory. Fig-
ure 3 indicates that the reﬁned forecasts (blue) were closer
to the ground truth (green) than the original forecasts (red)
for both days. Moreover, we compared the ground truth
data for the winds and the pressure that the main balloon
encountered. Table 1 highlights that the reﬁned predictions
showed signiﬁcantly lower error across all variables.
4. Conclusion and Future Work
We propose the idea of dropping additional sensors from
an ascending weather balloon in order to enhance the data
collection for the purposes of stratospheric weather analysis
and forecast. Our preliminary ﬁndings indicate that the
new framework powered by machine learning algorithms
can provide richer data and improved forecasts. Future
work entails the design and implementation of potentially
more efﬁcient online policies, and more compact hardware
design to enable a larger number of sensor deployments.
Furthermore, it is also important to envisage the minisonde
designs so that they are more easily recoverable after the
mission or built from materials that are biodegradable and
do not cause harm to the environment.Enhancing Stratospheric Weather Analyses and Forecasts by Deploying Sensors from a Weather Balloon
References
Dabberdt, W., Shellhorn, R., Cole, H., Paukkunen, A.,
H¨orhammer, J., and Antikainen, V . Radiosondes. 2003.
Durre, I., V ose, R. S., and Wuertz, D. B. Overview of the
integrated global radiosonde archive. Journal of Climate ,
19(1):53–68, 2006.
Flores, F., Rondanelli, R., D ´ıAZ, M., Querel, R., Mundnich,
K., Herrera, L. A., Pola, D., and Carricajo, T. The life
cycle of a radiosonde. Bulletin of the American Meteoro-
logical Society , 94(2):187–198, 2013.
Ingleby, B., Rodwell, M., and Isaksen, L. Global radiosonde
network under pressure. https://www.ecmwf.
int/en/newsletter/149/meteorology/
global-radiosonde-network-under-pressure ,
2016. Accessed: 2019-09-11.
Kapoor, A., Horvitz, Z., Laube, S., and Horvitz, E. Air-
planes aloft as a sensor network for wind forecasting.
InProceedings of the 13th international symposium on
Information processing in sensor networks , pp. 25–34.
IEEE Press, 2014.
NOAA. NOAA operational model archive and distribu-
tion system. https://nomads.ncep.noaa.gov:
9090/ , 2019a. Accessed: 2019-09-09.
NOAA. Integrated global radiosonde archive
(IGRA). https://www.ncdc.noaa.
gov/data-access/weather-balloon/
integrated-global-radiosonde-archive ,
2019b. Accessed: 2019-09-11.
Spaceﬂight, C. U. Cambridge university spaceﬂight landing
predictor. https://github.com/jonsowman/
cusf-standalone-predictor , 2009. Accessed:
2019-09-09.