Towards more efficient agricultural practices via
transformer-based crop type classification
E. Ulises Moya Sánchez1,2, Yazid S. Mikail3, Daisy Nyang’anyi4,
Michael J. Smith5, Isabella Smythe6
1Gobierno del estado de Jalisco,2TecMM Unidad Zapopan,3Climate Change AI,
4Kabarak University,5Aspia Space,6Columbia University
Abstract
Machine learning has great potential to increase crop production and resilience
to climate change. Accurate maps of where crops are grown are a key input
to several downstream policy and research applications. This proposal presents
preliminary work showing that it is possible to accurately classify crops from
time series derived from Sentinel 1 and 2 satellite imagery in Mexico using a
pixel-based binary crop/non-crop time series transformer model. We also find
preliminary evidence that meta-learning approaches supplemented with data from
similar agro-ecological zones may improve model performance. Due to these
promising results, we propose further development of this method with the goal of
accurate multi-class crop classification in Jalisco, Mexico via meta-learning with a
dataset comprising similar agro-ecological zones.
1 Agriculture and AI
Agriculture stands as the backbone of many economies worldwide, contributing as much as 60% to
a country’s GDP and acting as a source of livelihood for over one billion people globally [8, 5, 6].
The sector is highly affected by climate change due to the increasing prevalence of adverse weather
conditions such as prolonged droughts, increased temperatures and precipitation, and unpredictable
pests and diseases, all culminating in declining land productivity [5, 6]. According to the FAO
[2], about 757 million people worldwide face acute hunger in 2023. Moreover, the United Nations
estimates a 25 %global population growth by 2050, with developing and emerging economies within
Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa expected to grow the most [1]. This will ultimately put more
pressure on already strained food systems, and we cannot simply clear more agricultural land; doing
so results in deforestation and excessive use of resources such as environmentally damaging fertilizers
and chemicals to increase productivity. Instead of brute-forcing a solution to this problem, we must
find ways to use current resources more efficiently.
Accurate and timely crop classification is essential for centralized resource allocation, crop-specific
yield prediction, and agricultural policy making. For instance, allocating sufficient resources to
farmers throughout the year allows planting flexibility and greater efficiency. Also, crop suitability to
specific climates is crucial, as some crops require either cooler or warmer conditions, dictating optimal
planting times. Additionally, local demand plays a significant role: even if a farmer successfully
grows a large quantity of a product, it may not be possible to sell that product locally if there is
insufficient demand or storage capacity. Accurate and timely crop classification is therefore necessary
for increasing land productivity. However, traditional crop classification methods like on-the-ground
‘field walks’ and manual satellite imagery classification are error-prone and costly due to the need
for a human-in-the-loop. Machine learning methods do not have such downsides. These automatic
techniques can be deployed at scale far more efficiently than traditional crop classification as they do
not rely on manual intervention once trained.
Preprint. Under review.This paper’s contributions are two-fold: first, we present exploratory work on training a time series
transformer classifier on satellite imagery time series to distinguish between agricultural and non-
agricultural land. Second, we propose expanding this method to multi-class crop classification,
addressing a critical data gap for policymakers in Jalisco, Mexico.
2 Data and methods
All training locations
Filtered training locations
Figure 1: Locations of ground truth binary training
labels are shown in grey. Locations included in the
filtered sample of data with similar satellite time series
to Mexico are shown in green.Our proof-of-concept work uses a simpli-
fied satellite imagery time series dataset,
each corresponding to a location with a bi-
nary crop/non-crop label. Upstream data
sources are the NASA CropHarvest dataset
[9] and labels from Geo-wiki Landcover
2017. CropHarvest contains 12 Sentinel-
2 bands, two Sentinel-1 bands, ERA5
monthly average temperature and precipi-
tation, and SRTM DEM data on elevation
and topography. Sentinel data is processed
to contain the least cloudy observation per
month, with other observations discarded.
The model input is a 12-month yearly sam-
ple from February to February; all available
data is for the 2017 growing season.
We use a three-layer transformer [7] model based on upstream code from Zvonkov et al. [9]. Due to
their self-attention mechanism, transformers allow efficient modeling of long-range dependencies in
sequential data, making them well-suited for time series inputs like the ones used in this analysis.
The model is trained on three different datasets: Mexico data only, all global data, and a filtered
subset of the international data intended to capture regions agroecologically similar to Mexico. There
are several potential strategies for generating this filtered subset; as an initial approach, we assess
similarity based on the satellite, weather, and topology data in the NASA CropHarvest dataset. Using
Principal Component (PC) Analysis [3], the first 5 PCs for each pixel are calculated. For each PC,
the central 90 %of values found in the Mexico data constrains the allowed values; locations for which
any PCs fall outside this range are removed from the training dataset.
For each sample, we perform k-fold cross-validation with k= 20 . Training data is sampled with
replacement in each fold, and predictions are generated for the subset of Mexico data not used during
training. Since the data spans only one year, training folds are assigned for Mexico at the state level1
to decrease overfitting due to spatial auto-correlation. Each pixel is assigned the label predicted in the
majority of k-folds.
1Mexico is divided into 31 states, the largest administrative subdivision.
Actual classifications
Predicted classificationsNon-crop locations
Crop locations
Figure 2: Actual versus predicted crop classifications. The left plot shows ground truth labels; the
right plot shows labels predicted by a transformer model trained on the global dataset.
2The default model hyperparameters from Zvonkov et al. [9] are used for this preliminary analysis,
but we expect improvements from implementing cross-validated parameter selection. For the global
and filtered subset training samples, we use a learning rate of 10−4and train for 25 epochs; for the
Mexico-only model, a smaller learning rate and a larger number of epochs is used to improve stability
(lr= 10−5and 100 epochs). We use the Adam optimizer [4].
3 Results
Table 1: Results for proof-of-concept binary crop clas-
sifier. Column 2 shows the number of training samples;
columns 3-5 show performance for a model trained on
each region and tested in Mexico.
Region n Acc. Precision Recall
Mexico 673 86.3 52.2 60.8
Global 34270 90.0 65.0 67.0
Filtered 7656 88.0 56.9 68.0Results of preliminary models are shown
in Table 1. We find that expanding the
pool of training data increases overall ac-
curacy. However, the performance differ-
ence between models is relatively small,
especially since default hyperparameters
may be more appropriate for some training
samples than others. The model’s results
trained on the filtered sample are promis-
ing, but additional work on filtering and
meta-learning strategies is needed to de-
termine whether this outperforms simpler
approaches. Figure 2 compares ground
truth crop locations and model predictions.
Good general agreement corroborates the
quantitative results in Table 1.
4 Conclusions and proposal of future work
The initial proof of concept implemented here shows promising accuracy for distinguishing crop- and
non-crop pixels. Below, we highlight three significant directions for future work.
First, this preliminary analysis involved binary, pixel-level classification on a simplified dataset. While
improved accuracy for this task in historically understudied regions is valuable, the primary end goal
of this work is multi-class segmentation on the full Jalisco dataset provided by the Jalisco government.
Shifting to this more complex task will require adapting models from binary to multi-class estimation
and combining classification with image segmentation to detect field boundaries.
Second, these preliminary results use a standard transformer model with little tuning or adaptation
[9]. Developing task-specific transformer models and implementing cross-validated hyperparameter
selection are likely necessary to obtain optimal performance.
Finally, we propose a more in-depth analysis of the use of dataset augmentation and meta-learning.
In particular, the multi-class, Jalisco-specific dataset includes many more training data locations
(n= 35812 ), which may reduce the benefit of these approaches. Consolidating the multi-class Jalisco
labels with the binary supplementary data will also be necessary; for example, we can experiment with
a pre-training binary classification step followed by a secondary model to assign crop type to regions
classified as cropland. More robust experimentation with filtering approaches is needed, including
hand-filtering locations as a baseline, better accounting for differences in the timing of the growing
season between locations, and using variables that more directly capture relevant agroecological
conditions. Additionally, we expect benefits from shifting to a meta-learning approach rather than the
dataset augmentation used here.
Acknowledgments
We thank Climate Change AI and Mila for hosting us during part of this research, and express our
gratitude to the organisers of the 2024 Climate Change AI Summer School.
3References
[1] Walter P Falcon, Rosamond L Naylor, and Nikhil D Shankar. “Rethinking global food demand
for 2050”. In: Population and Development Review 48.4 (2022), pp. 921–957.
[2] Fao et al. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2024 . FAO ; IFAD ; UNICEF ;
WFP ; WHO ; 2024. ISBN : 978-92-5-138882-2. URL:https://openknowledge.fao.org/
items/7dab011e-db47-4c63-951e-c69e49111b65 .
[3] F. R. S. Karl Pearson. “LIII. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space”. In:
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science (1901). URL:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14786440109462720 .
[4] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”. In: ArXiv e-prints
(2014). DOI:10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980 . eprint: 1412.6980 .
[5] Cheikh Mbow et al. Food security . Tech. rep. IPCC, 2020.
[6] Collins M Musafiri et al. “Adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices among smallholder
farmers in Western Kenya: do socioeconomic, institutional, and biophysical factors matter?” In:
Heliyon 8.1 (2022).
[7] Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need.(Nips), 2017”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.03762 10 (2017), S0140525X16001837.
[8] World Bank Open Data . [Online; accessed 29. Aug. 2024]. 2024. URL:https : / / data .
worldbank.org/indicator/NV.AGR.TOTL.ZS .
[9] Ivan Zvonkov et al. “OpenMapFlow: A Library for Rapid Map Creation with Machine Learning
and Remote Sensing Data”. In: AAAI . 2023.
4