Detecting Methane Plumes using PRISMA: Deep
Learning Model and Data Augmentation
Alexis Groshenry
Kayrros SAS, Paris, France
ENS Paris-Saclay, Paris, France
a.groshenry@kayrros.comClement Giron
Kayrros SAS, Paris, France
c.giron@kayrros.com
Thomas Lauvaux
University of Reims Champagne Ardenne, GSMA, UMR 7331, France
thomas.lauvaux@univ-reims.fr
Alexandre d’Aspremont
CNRS, DI, Ecole Normale Supérieure
Kayrros SAS, Paris, France
aspremon@kayrros.comThibaud Ehret
ENS Paris-Saclay, Paris, France
thibaud.ehret@ens-paris-saclay.fr
Abstract
The new generation of hyperspectral imagers, such as PRISMA, has improved
significantly our detection capability of methane (CH 4) plumes from space at high
spatial resolution ( ∼30m). We present here a complete framework to identify CH 4
plumes using images from the PRISMA satellite mission and a deep learning model
able to detect plumes over large areas. To compensate for the relative scarcity of
PRISMA images, we trained our model by transposing high resolution plumes from
Sentinel-2 to PRISMA. Our methodology thus avoids computationally expensive
synthetic plume generation from Large Eddy Simulations by generating a broad and
realistic training database, and paves the way for large-scale detection of methane
plumes using future hyperspectral sensors (EnMAP, EMIT, CarbonMapper).
1 Introduction
Since 2019, the new generation of hyperspectral satellites (PRISMA, EnMAP, ...) collects an
unprecedented amount of atmospheric data enabling the retrieval of methane (CH 4) concentrations
over the globe at high spatial resolutions (around 30m per pixel). These satellite missions offer high
resolution and broad spectral coverage, in particular in the shortwave infrared (1 to 2.5 µm) where
methane absorption is significant. These specifications enable lower detection thresholds compared
to multispectral satellites for the identification and attribution of methane emissions from human
activities (large releases from point sources), thus offering a path to reduce CH 4emissions as pledged
by nations engaged in climate mitigation agreements [1].
The satellite PRISMA1was launched in 2019 with forthcoming satellite missions like EnMAP
offering similar coverage and performances. We propose here a complete processing pipeline for
methane plumes identification on images from PRISMA, allowing efficient large-scale monitoring of
these emissions. We present a novel automatic detection procedure that benefits from existing datasets
1Project carried out using PRISMA Products, ©of the Italian Space Agency (ASI), delivered under an ASI
Licence to Use
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2021.of CH 4images, collected by the previous generation of satellites (e.g. Sentinel). This approach
can combine multiple spaceborne CH 4imagers and enables the rapid development of a functional
processing chain applicable to any future satellite instruments.
2 Methods
2.1 Spectral Recalibration
PRISMA is a satellite orbiting the Earth in a near polar, sun-synchronous trajectory [ 2]. It carries a
hyperspectral pushbroom sensor, made up of a line of 1,000 hyperspectral individual sensors scanning
the ground. A spectral calibration of the 1,000 hyperspectral sensors is provided with the datacubes.
However, the nominal parameters used for the spectral calibration are not perfectly accurate since
they were determined on ground, while heat perturbations or vibrations may alter the correctness of
these parameters. Hence it is necessary to apply spectral recalibration to each PRISMA scene before
further processing.
This preprocessing step is done by generating a theoretical radiance spectrum using a radiative
transfer simulation modeling the emission of radiation by the Sun, its interactions with the Earth’s
atmosphere and reflection on the ground before being sent back towards the satellite’s sensors. This is
the so-called top-of-atmosphere radiance, which is eventually convolved with the sensors’ parameters
to get the simulated at-sensor radiance. The recalibration is then done by minimizing a distance
criterion between the theoretical spectrum and the averaged observed spectrum for each sensor.
2.2 Methane Retrieval
We use the matched filter algorithm to derive the map of methane concentrations from raw radiance
data from PRISMA. This algorithm allows for supervised target detection in signal processing and
has been frequently used to produce gas concentrations retrieval [ 3,4,5]. In our study, we use the
same formulation as described in [3].
For a target signal t∈Rdretrieved from an observed signal x∈Rdof mean µand covariance Σ, the
matched filter operator writes α(x) =(x−µ)TΣ−1t
tTΣ−1t. The observed signal xis the raw radiance data
and its statistics are computed for each sensor separately because of the differences of calibration.
The target signal tis defined as µ.k, with kbeing the Jacobian of the absorption spectrum for an
additional ppm of methane, calculated using radiative transfer simulations based on the HITRAN
database [6] and tools from the LOWTRAN program [7].
There are as many matched filters as sensors in the satellite’s detector, combined to generate a map of
column averaged mole fractions of CH 4(XCH 4)2on which the detection of methane plumes will be
done.
2.3 Automatic Plume Detection
2.3.1 Data
The main limitation in plume detection using PRISMA XCH 4images is due to the small number of
available images. PRISMA acquires data in tasking mode, hence producing few datacubes on targeted
and localized areas, a limited proportion of which are relevant to our methane plume detection goal.
Our study is based on 40 PRISMA images containing a total of 75 plumes of methane. This hardly
describes the great diversity of plumes (i.e. size, intensity, morphology) and associated background
(e.g. different levels of homogeneity, variable amount of noise, presence of clouds, roads, or buildings,
types of terrain). To illustrate the diversity of observed scenes, we provide some examples in Fig 5.
In previous studies, several methods have been proposed to generate synthetic XCH 4plumes, in
addition to regular data augmentation techniques. Gaussian plume simulations [ 8,9] rely on a simple
modelling of gas dispersion, but the final plume has a relatively naive shape, not representative of
complex spatial structures observed from space. To simulate more complex structures, Large Eddy
Simulations (LES) [ 10,11] rely on an accurate physical modelling of the atmospheric dispersion and
turbulence to generate realistic plumes. But these models remain which is computationally expensive.
2concentration of CH 4in the column of atmosphere between the satellite’s sensor and a pixel on the ground
2We propose here a novel synthetic plume generation technique that avoids the complex modelling of
LES, while providing realistic plume shapes. The task of domain adaptation aims at changing the
representation of a data, and seeks to transfer observed plume structures from one observing system
to another. Inspired by this broad concept, we designed a plume transfer method from Sentinel-2
images to PRISMA, able to modify the inner distribution of Sentinel-2 XCH 4plumes to match the
characteristics of the PRISMA instrument, while preserving the shape and aspect of the original
plume.
XCH 4plumes exhibit similar spatial distributions driven by atmospheric advection and diffusion: a
localized enhancement near the location of the source, and an extended area aligned with the direction
of the local wind (advection) decreasing with distance (diffusion). The XCH 4values inside a given
plume follow a specific distribution directly dependent on the local atmospheric conditions (wind
speed, turbulence conditions, and surface properties). Based on this observation, we assumed a
gamma distribution model for the distribution of XCH 4enhancements from the labeled plumes in
PRISMA images. At data generation time, for a given Sentinel-2 plume from Ehret et al. [12] with
npixpixels, we sample a random distribution of XCH 4concentrations from the estimated distributions
of the parameters. From the gamma distribution defined by these parameters, we can then sample
npixvalues and apply histogram specification [ 13] to replace the old values of the plume by these
new ones. The final step consists in adding the forged plume to a PRISMA image with no detected
XCH 4plume. Addition is preferred to replacement of the concerned pixels in order to preserve the
level of noise and the contribution of the underlying elements to the result of the matched-filter. This
procedure, illustrated in Fig. 4, allows to generate a great amount of unseen training data for the
model: any plume from Sentinel-2 among the 1000 labeled samples can be transferred to any of the
150 available backgrounds from PRISMA at a random position and orientation. We also added a
criterion on the signal-to-background ratio in order to control the level of contrast of the synthetic
plume to the background: at the beginning of the training, we impose that images have a high contrast
with the background in order to facilitate model learning. We gradually increase the complexity by
lowering this criterion.
2.3.2 Model
The detection step is performed using a U-Net architecture, which is one of the most popular
architecture for segmentation [ 14]. The network is designed to predict a probability map by applying
a normalized exponential function (softmax) activation to the output of the final convolutional layer.
Each pixel is thus assigned a probability of belonging to a XCH 4plume. This map is then converted
into a binary mask by applying a hysteresis thresholding with a low threshold and a large threshold.
This approach allows us to detect the whole plume and not only the area close to the source exhibiting
the highest XCH 4concentrations. In order to validate the artificial plume generation technique, we
train the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) solely on synthetic data, following the procedure
described in Sec. 2.3.1, and evaluate its performances on XCH 4images from PRISMA. We also
compare the performances of our approach to a neural network using an identical architecture trained
on the original Sentinel-2 images, with a final transfer learning step to adapt the task to detection in
PRISMA images. More precisely, we froze the pre-trained weights of the encoding layers responsible
for the extraction of general features and the creation of a meaningful lower dimension representation,
and only trained the decoding layers that use this representation for the objective task.
3 Results
Methane Retrieval The implemented retrieval method provides maps of XCH 4enhancements in
which plumes can be identified. Examples of such images are available in Fig. 5 to illustrate the
diversity of data discussed previously that makes detection challenging. We also observe the presence
of false positives in the retrieval results. False positives are elements in the scene with a high response
but do not correspond to higher XCH 4concentrations. False positives are caused by aerosols or
heterogeneous surface properties with strong spectral signatures [ 15] similar to methane, such as
hydrocarbon paints on buildings or roads, mountain ridges/slopes or sand dunes.
Automatic Plume Detection We present examples of detection results of the network trained
solely on synthetic plumes in Fig. 1. From a qualitative point of view, the network predicts high
probabilities on the whole plume, with a confidence peak on the emission source. It also shows
3robustness against size variations, even if a few false positives remain, mostly inherited from false
positives of the retrieval method. Adjusting the thresholds of the hysteresis postprocessing allows to
control a trade-off on the detection performance (see Fig. 2). Indeed, increasing the large threshold
reduces the number of false positives, but true plumes may be ignored. Similarly, increasing the low
threshold improves the overall Intersection over Union (IoU), but leads to the loss of diffuse parts of
the plume (see Fig. 3).
Figure 1: Examples of automatically-detected XCH 4plumes including XCH 4concentration maps
(left column), the probability map predicted by the network (second column), hysteresis thresholding
(third column), and manually labeled ground truth (right column)
Figure 2: detection precision against recall
Figure 3: detection precision against
Intersection over Union (IoU)
In table 1, we make a quantitative comparison between the performance of the model trained from
scratch on artificial data, and the model obtained by transfer learning from pre-trained weights learnt
on Sentinel-2 images. For both approaches, we consider the hysteresis thresholds producing the best
IoU. The detection metrics are computed on a mask basis, a mask being considered a true positive if it
intersects a ground-truth mask. The model trained from scratch on synthetic plumes outperforms the
model by transfer learning on both the detection and segmentation tasks. The latter notably detects a
large number of false positives, leading to a poor precision and IoU even if it reaches a slightly better
recall. We also observe a drop when passing from the IoU to the mean IoU (mIoU), which can be
explained by the fact that the model often fails to detect the smallest plumes.
Table 1: Models performance comparison for automatic methane plume detection
detection metrics segmentation metrics
precision recall f1-score IoU mIoU
Transfer Learning 0.28 0.53 0.37 0.21 0.13
Plumes Transfer 0.88 0.42 0.57 0.61 0.19
Conclusion
In this study, we presented a full processing pipeline for the identification of methane plumes in
hyperspectral images from PRISMA. It makes uses of classic methods for the spectral recalibration
and methane concentrations retrieval. We also propose an automatic detection approach based on a
CNN that is trained from scratch using a plume transfer method to generate training samples from
methane plumes in Sentinel-2 images. This novel approach allows the training of a dedicated model
for a new remote sensing technology, while mostly relying on data from previous satellites.
4References
[1]P. Forster, T. Storelvmo, K. Armour, W. Collins, J.-L. Dufresne, D. Frame, D. Lunt, T. Mauritsen,
M. Palmer, M. Watanabe, M. Wild, and H. Zhang, “The Earth’s Energy Budget, Climate
Feedbacks, and Climate Sensitivity,” in Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed.), Cambridge University
Press, 2021.
[2]S. Cogliati, F. Sarti, L. Chiarantini, M. Cosi, R. Lorusso, E. Lopinto, F. Miglietta, L. Genesio,
L. Guanter, A. Damm, S. Pérez-López, D. Scheffler, G. Tagliabue, C. Panigada, U. Rascher,
T. Dowling, C. Giardino, and R. Colombo, “The prisma imaging spectroscopy mission: overview
and first performance analysis,” Remote Sensing of Environment , vol. 262, p. 112499, 09 2021.
[3]L. Guanter, I. Irakulis-Loitxate, J. Gorroño, E. Sánchez-García, D. H. Cusworth, D. J. Varon,
S. Cogliati, and R. Colombo, “Mapping methane point emissions with the prisma spaceborne
imaging spectrometer,” Remote Sensing of Environment , vol. 265, p. 112671, 2021.
[4]A. K. Thorpe, D. A. Roberts, E. S. Bradley, C. C. Funk, P. E. Dennison, and I. Leifer, “High
resolution mapping of methane emissions from marine and terrestrial sources using a cluster-
tuned matched filter technique and imaging spectrometry,” Remote Sensing of Environment ,
vol. 134, pp. 305–318, 2013.
[5]D. R. Thompson, I. Leifer, H. Bovensmann, M. Eastwood, M. Fladeland, C. Frankenberg,
K. Gerilowski, R. O. Green, S. Kratwurst, T. Krings, B. Luna, and A. K. Thorpe, “Real-time
remote detection and measurement for airborne imaging spectroscopy: a case study with
methane,” Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 4383–4397, 2015.
[6]I. Gordon, L. Rothman, R. Hargreaves, R. Hashemi, E. Karlovets, F. Skinner, E. Conway,
C. Hill, R. Kochanov, Y . Tan, P. Wcisło, A. Finenko, K. Nelson, P. Bernath, M. Birk, V . Boudon,
A. Campargue, K. Chance, A. Coustenis, B. Drouin, J. Flaud, R. Gamache, J. Hodges,
D. Jacquemart, E. Mlawer, A. Nikitin, V . Perevalov, M. Rotger, J. Tennyson, G. Toon, H. Tran,
V . Tyuterev, E. Adkins, A. Baker, A. Barbe, E. Canè, A. Császár, A. Dudaryonok, O. Egorov,
A. Fleisher, H. Fleurbaey, A. Foltynowicz, T. Furtenbacher, J. Harrison, J. Hartmann, V . Horne-
man, X. Huang, T. Karman, J. Karns, S. Kassi, I. Kleiner, V . Kofman, F. Kwabia–Tchana,
N. Lavrentieva, T. Lee, D. Long, A. Lukashevskaya, O. Lyulin, V . Makhnev, W. Matt, S. Massie,
M. Melosso, S. Mikhailenko, D. Mondelain, H. Müller, O. Naumenko, A. Perrin, O. Polyansky,
E. Raddaoui, P. Raston, Z. Reed, M. Rey, C. Richard, R. Tóbiás, I. Sadiek, D. Schwenke,
E. Starikova, K. Sung, F. Tamassia, S. Tashkun, J. Vander Auwera, I. Vasilenko, A. Vigasin,
G. Villanueva, B. Vispoel, G. Wagner, A. Yachmenev, and S. Yurchenko, “The hitran2020
molecular spectroscopic database,” Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer ,
vol. 277, p. 107949, 2022.
[7]F. Kneizys, E. Shettle, L. Abreu, J. Chetwynd, and G. Anderson, “User guide to lowtran 7,”
p. 146, 08 1988.
[8]H. Bovensmann, M. Buchwitz, J. P. Burrows, M. Reuter, T. Krings, K. Gerilowski, O. Schneising,
J. Heymann, A. Tretner, and J. Erzinger, “A remote sensing technique for global monitoring
of power plant co 2emissions from space and related applications,” Atmospheric Measurement
Techniques , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 781–811, 2010.
[9]T. Krings, K. Gerilowski, M. Buchwitz, J. Hartmann, T. Sachs, J. Erzinger, J. P. Burrows,
and H. Bovensmann, “Quantification of methane emission rates from coal mine ventilation
shafts using airborne remote sensing data,” Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 151–166, 2013.
[10] S. Jongaramrungruang, A. K. Thorpe, G. Matheou, and C. Frankenberg, “Methanet – an ai-
driven approach to quantifying methane point-source emission from high-resolution 2-d plume
imagery,” Remote Sensing of Environment , vol. 269, p. 112809, 2022.
[11] S. Jongaramrungruang, C. Frankenberg, G. Matheou, A. Thorpe, D. Thompson, L. Kuai, and
R. Duren, “Towards accurate methane point-source quantification from high-resolution 2-d
plume imagery,” Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , vol. 12, pp. 6667–6681, 12 2019.
5[12] T. Ehret, A. Truchis, M. Mazzolini, J.-M. Morel, A. d’Aspremont, T. Lauvaux, R. Duren,
D. Cusworth, and G. Facciolo, “Global tracking and quantification of oil and gas methane
emissions from recurrent sentinel-2 imagery,” Environmental Science Technology , vol. 56, 07
2022.
[13] R. Gonzalez and R. Woods, Digital Image Processing (3rd Edition) . 01 2006.
[14] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation,” vol. 9351, pp. 234–241, 10 2015.
[15] M. D. Foote, P. E. Dennison, A. K. Thorpe, D. R. Thompson, S. Jongaramrungruang, C. Franken-
berg, and S. C. Joshi, “Fast and accurate retrieval of methane concentration from imaging
spectrometer data using sparsity prior,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,
vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 6480–6492, 2020.
6Appendix
Figure 4: Protocol for realistic methane plume transfer from a Sentinel-2 image to a PRISMA image
with no plume
7Figure 5: Some methane concentration maps illustrating the diversity of studied data. The bounding
boxes correspond to manually identified methane plumes.
8Figure 6: A synthetic plume added to a PRISMA background with an increasing contrast (from left
to right)
Figure 7: Same synthetic plume added to different backgrounds
Figure 8: Several synthetic plumes added to the same background
9