Privacy Preserving Demand Forecasting to Encourage
Consumer Acceptance of Smart Energy Meters
Christopher Briggs
School of Computing
& Mathematics
Keele University
Keele, Staffordshire, UK
c.briggs@keele.ac.ukZhong Fan
School of Computing
& Mathematics
Keele University
Keele, Staffordshire, UK
z.fan@keele.ac.ukPeter Andras
School of Computing
& Mathematics
Keele University
Keele, Staffordshire, UK
p.andras@keele.ac.uk
Abstract
In this proposal paper we highlight the need for privacy preserving energy demand
forecasting to allay a major concern consumers have about smart meter installations.
High resolution smart meter data can expose many private aspects of a consumer’s
household such as occupancy, habits and individual appliance usage. Yet smart
metering infrastructure has the potential to vastly reduce carbon emissions from the
energy sector through improved operating efﬁciencies. We propose the application
of a distributed machine learning setting known as federated learning for energy
demand forecasting at various scales to make load prediction possible whilst
retaining the privacy of consumers’ raw energy consumption data.
1 Motivation & Impact
Smart meters are being deployed in many countries across the world for the purpose of optimising
efﬁciency within electricity grids and giving consumers insight into their energy usage. The meters
record energy consumption within a building directly from the electricity supply and periodically
communicate this data to energy suppliers and other entities in the energy sector. Smart meter data
contain an enormous amount of potential predictive power that will aid the transition from fossil
fuel technologies to cleaner and renewable technologies [ 1]. However this high-resolution data is
particularly sensitive as it can easily enable inference about household occupancy, lifestyle habits or
even what and when speciﬁc appliances are being used in a household.
A large contribution of renewables in the energy mix poses a signiﬁcant challenge for balancing
supply and demand. If peak demand coincides with low wind/solar inputs, energy must be provided
by reliable backup generation, such as idling gas turbines. Such solutions are very costly, both
economically and environmentally and serve to discourage the installation of large amounts of
renewable energy production. Reliable forecasting will provide opportunity for more efﬁcient
optimisation of electricity grids to cope with varying energy demand.
With a rapidly evolving global climate and swinging extremes of temperature, large heating and
cooling loads will become a more signiﬁcant factor in energy demand proﬁles. Additionally, as other
areas of our daily lives become decarbonised, loads from electric vehicles etc. will pose a strain on
electricity grids. Accurate forecasting is important here to understand how demand is evolving with
consumer behaviour change. Demand side response applications - those that actively or suggestively
seek to reduce peak loads when necessary - can also beneﬁt from accurate realtime forecasting.
Despite the beneﬁts for promoting a greener energy sector, smart meter installation in most countries
is an opt-in process and levels of adoption of smart meters remains low. Data privacy and security
concerns are among the most cited reasons consumers give for rejecting a smart meter installation [ 2].
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.The reasons consumers give as privacy concerns with smart meters include government surveillance,
energy companies selling data and illegal data acquisition/use [ 3]. Although smart meter privacy has
been recognised as an important issue by researchers in both energy and computing for over a decade
[4,5], tackling it from a privacy preserving machine learning perspective is a novel area of research.
In this paper, we propose the use of a modern distributed machine learning setting known as federated
learning to train accurate energy demand forecasting models that preserve the privacy of consumer
energy consumption data to enable greater adoption of smart meters by privacy-concious consumers.
2 Traditional Energy Demand Forecasting Approaches
Various models, both simple and complex have been applied to energy demand forecasting. Simple
methods based on autoregressive (AR) and moving average (MA) models apply a mathematical
operation to demand data formatted as a time series. These models assume the time series to be
stationary and work well for producing short-term forecasts, yet poorly in the longer-term as they
only account for recent past historical data. Regression methods such as linear regression model the
relationship between input data and a target output. These models are simple to construct and have
some level of interpretability. Artiﬁcial neural networks improve on these regression models as they
transform the inputs in a non-linear fashion to make predictions. The most successful neural network
architectures for forecasting are based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as Long-Short Term
Memory networks (LSTMs). These architectures can learn what long and short term information
to pay attention to during the training process. Recent surveys compare and contrast traditional and
modern approaches to energy consumption forecasting and conclude that AI-based methods (such as
those that utilise neural networks) offer the greatest predictive performance across all forecasting
horizons [6, 7].
The key drawback to how all these methods have been applied in the energy demand forecasting
literature at present is the need for data to be centralised. Clearly the privacy of consumer energy
consumption data can easily be violated in such cases.
3 Proposed Privacy Preserving Energy Demand Forecasting Approach
Federated learning [ 8] is a setting that allows for distributing the training of a machine learning
model over many devices or clients without the necessity for clients to share their raw datasets. In a
typical federated learning setup, a central entity orchestrates the training schedule. The central entity
provides a parameter server that stores a global model which the clients can read and write to. At
the start of training, the parameter server is randomly initialised with its global model. In a round
of training, a fraction of clients are selected to download the global model. These clients proceed
to train a local model initialised from the global model on their local datasets for a pre-determined
number of epochs. The difference between the global and trained local model forms a weight vector
which becomes the payload that each client sends back to the parameter server. These vectors are
aggregated at the parameter server, for example by taking the average of all the local models as in
the FedAvg algorithm [ 8]. This aggregated model then becomes the new global model. Training
proceeds in rounds, selecting clients and training in a distributed manner until the model converges to
some ﬁxed accuracy or other desirable metric. In this setting, no raw data from any client is shared
with the central entity or with other clients, affording clients some level of privacy over their data.
To further protect privacy, federated learning can be combined with differential privacy in order to
add noise to the local model updates and obscure individual contributions to the global model [ 9].
Additionally secure aggregation can be applied to deny the central entity the opportunity to observe
individual client models at all, only in aggregate [10].
For the purpose of forecasting, any model that can be iteratively optimised to minimise an objective
function of the form:
min
w2Rd1
mmX
i=1fi(w): (1)
can be trained under the federated learning setting. Here wis a parameterised model, fiis a local
objective function and mis the number of clients over which the aggregation is taking place. This
2covers many forecasting algorithms from simple linear regressions to very complex recurrent neural
networks. LSTM’s have been shown to have exceptional predictive power where long and short-
term dependencies are observed in a dataset [ 11]. This is the case in energy consumption data
where seasonal cycles, local weather conditions, day of the week and time of day affect the energy
consumption of individual households.
For our purposes, a high quality dataset is publicly available from the Low Carbon London project
[12] that was conducted between 2011 and 2014, led by UK Power Networks. This dataset contains
half-hourly energy consumption readings for 5,567 households in London, UK. As the households
are all in close proximity, spread across a single city, the data can be combined with historic weather
data such as temperature and humidity. This weather data adds valuable signals into the forecasting
model to improve accuracy as is applied in most of the energy demand forecasting literature.
To evaluate the effectiveness of federated learning in this domain, we plan to contrast this approach
with traditional learning using the same model architecture on centralised data which is typical of
all previous energy demand forecasting research. We hope to show that short-term, medium-term
and long-term forecasting models can compete with centralised learning whilst also preserving the
privacy of consumers’ energy consumption data. Model accuracy is the key measurement by which
to compare models, however in the forecasting literature there are several methods for measuring
accuracy with varying beneﬁts and drawbacks [ 7]. The most robust metrics are the mean absolute
percentage error (MAPE) and the co-efﬁcient of variation of the root mean squared error (CV-RMSE).
It is these metrics we will apply in our study in order to compare with other results in the literature.
By deploying accurate forecasting in a privacy preserving manner, we expect greater acceptance from
consumers to install a smart meter that will help to drive the decarbonisation of energy grids around
the world.
Where forecasting is required on the supply side, secure aggregation [ 10] and/or differential privacy
[9] can be employed to communicate predictions from individual clients to a central entity in a privacy
preserving manner. The parameters of differential privacy can be adapted to afford a lesser or greater
amount of privacy which has an effect on model performance which can be quantiﬁed and measured.
4 Challenges: Applying Federated Learning to Energy Demand Forecasting
Federated learning adds a layer of complexity to machine learning tasks. Here we discuss some of the
most signiﬁcant barriers to deployment of this technology for real-world energy demand forecasting
using smart meter data.
Communicating large models between rounds of training In some domains communicating
model updates consumes less bandwidth than communicating the raw data itself (e.g video feeds).
However for energy demand forecasting, communicating a large weight vector representing a model
update vs half-hourly consumption readings represents a signiﬁcant increase in bandwidth to train
a model using federated learning. Additionally, smart metering infrastructure tends to use slower
2G mobile networks for communication. However methods for compressing model updates through
sparsiﬁcation have shown great promise to reduce the size of communication payloads with little
harm to model performance [ 13]. Reducing the fraction of clients selected to participate in training
would also reduce how often individual clients need to communicate.
Lack of compute on current smart meters Smart meters deployed today have very little compu-
tational capability. As such, training a mid/large sized machine learning model would be infeasible.
However, smart meters are now starting to be deployed with in-home digital displays (IHDs) which
have signiﬁcantly faster hardware and higher capacity to run more complex tasks such as machine
learning. Moreover, IHDs can be connected to a home-based WiFi network that could aid in commu-
nicating the large weight vectors inherent in federated learning.
Statistical heterogeneity among participating clients Federated learning has been shown to
perform considerably worse under non-IID assumptions, where the data distribution among clients
is signiﬁcantly skewed. We propose to tackle this problem by applying our previous work [ 14]
which identiﬁes clusters of clients that provide similar model updates and isolates further federated
optimisation within each identiﬁed cluster.
3Acknowledgements
This work is partly supported by the SEND project (grant ref. 32R16P00706) funded by ERDF and
BEIS. We would also like to thank Hildebrand Technology Limited for helpful discussions on the
feasibility of deployment of a federated learning energy demand forecasting application.
References
[1]Smart meter beneﬁts: Role of smart meters in responding
to climate change. [Online]. Available: https://www.smartenergygb.
org/en/-/media/SmartEnergy/essential-documents/press-resources/Documents/
Smart-Energy-GB-report-2---Role-in-climate-change-mitigation-Final_updated-300819.
ashx?la=en&hash=E353C643DBFA500BDA2DDBB55F599575B1FE21B5
[2]N. Balta-Ozkan, O. Amerighi, and B. Boteler, “A comparison of consumer perceptions to-
wards smart homes in the UK, Germany and Italy: reﬂections for policy and future research,”
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management , vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1176–1195, Dec. 2014.
[3]E. McKenna, I. Richardson, and M. Thomson, “Smart meter data: Balancing consumer privacy
concerns with legitimate applications,” Energy Policy , vol. 41, pp. 807–814, Feb. 2012.
[4]C. Efthymiou and G. Kalogridis, “Smart Grid Privacy via Anonymization of Smart Metering
Data,” in 2010 1st IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGrid-
Comm) . IEEE, pp. 238–243.
[5]G. Kalogridis, M. Sooriyabandara, Z. Fan, and M. A. Mustafa, “Toward Uniﬁed Security and
Privacy Protection for Smart Meter Networks,” IEEE Systems Journal , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 641–654,
Jun. 2014.
[6]N. Wei, C. Li, X. Peng, F. Zeng, and X. Lu, “Conventional models and artiﬁcial intelligence-
based models for energy consumption forecasting: A review,” Journal of Petroleum Science
and Engineering , vol. 181, Oct. 2019.
[7]M. Bourdeau, X. Q. Zhai, E. Nefzaoui, X. Guo, and P. Chatellier, “Modeling and forecasting
building energy consumption: A review of data-driven techniques,” Sustainable Cities and
Society , vol. 48, Jul. 2019.
[8]B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, “Communication-Efﬁcient
Learning of Deep Networks from Decentralized Data,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics ,
2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[9]H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, K. Talwar, and L. Zhang, “Learning Differentially Private
Recurrent Language Models,” ICLR , 2018.
[10] K. Bonawitz, V . Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMahan, S. Patel, D. Ramage,
A. Segal, and K. Seth, “Practical Secure Aggregation for Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning,”
inProceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security .
ACM, Oct. 2017, pp. 1175–1191.
[11] W. Kong, Z. Y . Dong, Y . Jia, D. J. Hill, Y . Xu, and Y . Zhang, “Short-Term Residential Load
Forecasting Based on LSTM Recurrent Neural Network,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid ,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 841–851, Jan. 2019.
[12] SmartMeter Energy Consumption Data in London Households. [Online]. Available:
https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/smartmeter-energy-use-data-in-london-households
[13] J. Kone ˇcný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtárik, A. T. Suresh, and D. Bacon, “Federated
Learning: Strategies for Improving Communication Efﬁciency,” NIPS Workshop on Private
Multi-Party Machine Learning , 2016.
[14] C. Briggs, Z. Fan, and P. Andras, “Federated learning with hierarchical clustering of local
updates to improve training on non-IID data,” in 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN) . IEEE, Sep. 2020.
4