Hybrid physics-based and data-driven modeling with
calibrated uncertainty for lithium-ion battery
degradation diagnosis and prognosis
Jing Lin, Yu Zhang, Edwin Khoo
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
{lin_jing, zhang_yu, edwin_khoo}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract
Advancing lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) in both design and usage is key to pro-
moting electriﬁcation in the coming decades to mitigate human-caused climate
change. Inadequate understanding of LIB degradation is an important bottleneck
that limits battery durability and safety. Here, we propose hybrid physics-based
and data-driven modeling for online diagnosis and prognosis of battery degradation.
Compared to existing battery modeling efforts, we aim to build a model with
physics as its backbone and statistical learning techniques as enhancements. Such
a hybrid model has better generalizability and interpretability together with a well-
calibrated uncertainty associated with its prediction, rendering it more valuable
and relevant to safety-critical applications under realistic usage scenarios.
1 Lithium-ion batteries, electriﬁcation and climate change
By reducing greenhouse gas emissions to mitigate climate change, electriﬁcation plays an essential
role in distributed energy consumption, such as electric vehicles, and in centralized power grid supply,
where energy storage facilities are needed to mediate the mismatch between load requirements
and intermittent renewable energy sources such as sunlight, wind, and tide. In such applications,
rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) [ 1] are an increasingly pivotal technology for energy storage
and conversion. Therefore, much effort has been devoted in the past decades towards LIB materials
development and design improvement [2, 3], modeling [4], and real-time control [5].
A common key aspect underlying these endeavors is understanding, detecting, and predicting battery
degradation [ 6], of which the effectiveness will directly impact the performance, durability, safety,
and cost of LIBs. In this project, we propose the approach of hybrid physics-based and data-driven
modeling for online diagnosis and prognosis, by which we mean estimation of battery state of health
(SOH) and prediction of remaining useful life (RUL), respectively, under typical usage patterns.
We would like to emphasize two main threads of model development. First, we want to minimize
reliance on historical usage data in diagnosis and prognosis, which will enhance the applicability
and practicality of the approach. Second, we make heavy use of known physical knowledge of both
charge/discharge cycling and degradation to reduce the amount of training data required, and increase
the generalizability as well as interpretability of the modeling approach.
2 Gaps in past research on battery degradation prediction
We ﬁrst categorize current methodologies for SOH estimation, RUL prediction and degradation
prognosis along three main dimensions, all of which affect their relevance to practical usage scenarios,
and then review where various lines of past research lie in this landscape.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2021.The ﬁrst dimension is whether the cycling history of a battery cell is required. For example, the linear
regression model by Severson et al. [ 7] requires the discharge curves of the ﬁrst 100 cycles for each
cell, which prohibits its generalization and application to a cell at an unknown aging stage.
The second dimension regards whether degradation dynamics is explicitly modeled. Most purely
data-driven SOH predictions take an end-to-end approach, mapping from past usage [ 7,8] or current
state directly to RUL. In contrast, some researchers attempt to relate incremental capacity fade to
the cell state and usage within a short interval empirically using machine learning (ML) [ 9]. Such a
dynamical model can then be used to project future degradation and RUL under typical usage patterns.
The latter approach typically better utilizes the underlying dynamical structure of the system, yields
richer information to be validated, and more readily adapts to an online estimation setting.
The third dimension concerns how much prior physical knowledge is explicitly adopted for SOH
prognosis [ 9]. The prediction models that use minimal physical knowledge are those purely based on
supervised ML and agnostic of any physical principles, which ﬁt a speciﬁed function approximator,
such as a linear regressor or a random forest, to a set of input-output data by optimization and
inference. For prognosis, the input usually consists of time series of charge, voltage, current and
temperature characterizing the usage history, while the output is RUL. Some researchers attempt to
map these raw time series directly to RUL using fully connected or convolutional neural networks [ 8],
while others leverage physical knowledge about degradation patterns to engineer some features
manually before feeding them to more conventional algorithms for variable selection and parameter
ﬁtting [ 7,10]. Some sequence-based models such as recurrent and long-short-term memory (LSTM)
neural networks are promising for utilizing the raw time-series cycling data available, but their
effectiveness remains to be proven on ﬁeld data. Overall, statistical learning theory dictates that the
performance of purely data-driven models will likely deteriorate on unseen data that are distributed
differently from training data, which is already manifested in the overﬁtting exhibited by some of
the more complex models [ 8]. Due to scarcity of laboratory cycling data and noise in ﬁeld data, this
weakness severely limits such models’ applicability to more realistic cell usage.
Lying between purely empirical and physical models is the family of equivalent circuit models
(ECMs). An ECM uses an electrical circuit with components of resistors, capacitors, inductors,
and voltage sources to mimic the electrical response of a cell to external loads, without explicitly
modeling the underlying reactions and mass transport. Due to their simplicity and low computational
requirements, ECMs are widely adopted for real-time SOH estimation in battery management
systems [ 5,11]. Since all the underlying complicated physics and electrochemistry are lumped into a
simple circuit, an ECM’s ﬁdelity can dramatically drop in less normal operating conditions such as
fast charging, which are exactly the scenarios that cause signiﬁcant degradation.
Lastly, purely physical models leverage knowledge on degradation modes to formulate dynamical
systems that characterize the degradation evolution [ 12] in a battery model, such as a single parti-
cle [13] or pseudo-two-dimensional model [ 14], under the framework of porous electrode theory.
Besides their higher computational costs, these models have not been sufﬁciently validated by a
diverse cycling data set, and the value they can add to SOH and degradation prediction has not yet
been fully investigated using ﬁeld data and thus remains unclear to date.
The aforementioned limitations naturally lead to the following question: putting costs aside, how
far can computational modeling take us towards reliable online diagnosis and prognosis of battery
degradation that can be adapted to different cell types and usage patterns without making excessive
assumptions about operational histories? This question is nontrivial because a more complex model
does not necessarily lead to higher ﬁdelity, especially in the regime where multiple highly nonlinear
and coupled physical and electrochemical phenomena occur. We believe it is important to identify
the accuracy limit of uncertainty-calibrated [ 15] computational modeling in addition to its efﬁciency.
3 Proposed hybrid physics-based and data-driven modeling approach
Here, we propose our initial steps towards studying the accuracy limit of computational modeling for
battery degradation diagnosis and prognosis.
First, we want to investigate the adequacy of various common battery models, such as variants
of ECM, SPM (single particle model), SPMe (single particle model with electrolyte) and DFN
(Doyle-Fuller-Newman) models [ 16], for characterizing batteries degraded to different extents. In
2particular, we can ﬁt the parameters of these models to the charge/discharge curves of cells degraded
to different stages from experimental cycling data in [ 7] and obtain the uncertainty associated with
parameter estimation using algorithms for inverse problems, as shown in Figure 1. The overall model
accuracy will indicate whether the parameter space of each model is sufﬁciently rich to adequately
describe a cell’s degradation state, while the uncertainty will indicate parameter identiﬁability [ 17]
and sensitivity [ 18]. Moreover, by observing what parameters change across aging and how they vary,
we can diagnose and identify potential underlying degradation mechanisms.
Literature, such as [ 9], often emphasizes the “path dependence” of battery degradation, but this is
mostly due to an overly simpliﬁed representation of the dynamic state of a cell and is not inherent to
the underlying physics. Compared to empirically summarizing the correlation between past usage and
future degradation, we believe pursuing a more reﬁned cell state characterization that better encodes
the impacts of past usage on current SOH will enable more robust and generalizable prognosis.
Figure 1: Parameter identiﬁability and sensitivity study based on a cycling dataset. Here, y=
H[u] +eis the observation model, where uis the state vector of the battery model @tu=L[u;],
H[]is the observation operator that relates the observed quantity yto stateu, andeis the observation
noise. Moreover, operator L[]characterizes the dynamical battery model with as the parameters.
Second, as illustrated in Figure 2, we will examine the adequacy of the physics-based dynamic
degradation models reviewed by [ 12], which describe how certain parameters, such as porosity,
surface area and species diffusivities of the electrodes, evolve due to side reactions and material
fatigue. We will study whether incorporating these models will yield similar parameter trends across
degradation to those obtained empirically from the ﬁrst step. Again, we will quantify the uncertainty
associated with parameter estimation and check identiﬁability and sensitivity of the parameters of
these degradation models. We will also attempt model selection jointly with parameter estimation by,
e.g. sparse regression [ 19], to identify relevant degradation modes from the cycling data automatically.
Moreover, we will also study potential residual terms ( RuandRin Figure 2) [ 20,21] as certain
Gaussian processes or statistical ML models to account for the patterns of observed degradation data
that cannot be adequately captured by existing physical models. Unknown functional dependence
of parameters on state of charge (SOC) and temperature can also be modeled this way as model
uncertainty. There have been numerous efforts devoted to scientiﬁc ML for battery degradation [ 9,20],
and we believe for this case, a physics-based model with ML playing an assistive role is potentially
more accurate and generalizable. This task may be challenging because of the limited amount of
publicly available cycling data, but even if we cannot identify the model bias accurately, as long as
the magnitude of the model errors is well characterized by a well calibrated uncertainty, this can
signiﬁcantly facilitate state and parameter estimation and yield more reliable predictions.
Figure 2: Fitting full battery degradation dynamics to cycling data. Compared to Figure 1, we also
have a dynamical system that models the degradation explicitly with being its parameters. Ru
andRdenote potential residual data-driven models that can be stochastic processes or ML models.
Lastly, in Figure 3, we will attempt to integrate our hybrid models into an online ﬁltering/data
assimilation framework [ 22] where both state variables and model parameters are jointly updated by
combining model prediction and sequential observation data in an online and principled manner. Here,
we have ample ﬂexibility in choosing what parameters must be inferred online due to larger variation
3and sensitivity, and how frequently they are updated. While this procedure may be computationally
impractical for current battery management systems, verifying its effectiveness serves as a valuable
benchmark for future model reduction. The growing power and popularity of cloud computing and
internet of things infrastructure [5] also makes this approach feasible in the near future.
Figure 3: Integrating the hybrid modeling approach for battery degradation diagnosis and prognosis
into an online ﬁltering/data assimilation framework [22].
For our hybrid models to be useful and relevant to the battery community’s diverse expertise and
requirements, we strive to make them at least easily veriﬁable by following best practices for reporting
sufﬁcient details about the models and associated assumptions and limitations [23].
4 Impacts
The ability to reliably identify and predict battery degradation is essential for accelerating battery
design iteration and wider adoption of electriﬁcation, which plays a pivotal role in mitigating climate
change. Hybridizing physics-based models and statistical learning has a high potential for boosting
the limit of computational modeling for online battery degradation diagnosis and prognosis. Accurate
predictions with well-calibrated uncertainty are valuable for safety-critical applications and enable
further generalization to real ﬁeld data [ 9]. With ever-growing cloud storage, computing resources,
and wireless connection facilities [ 5], this will also lead to more effective and versatile battery
management systems for local control. Moreover, more effective SOH estimation will likely unlock
more second-life applications such as stationary energy storage [ 9], making batteries more recyclable
and environment-friendly. Finally, this hybrid modeling endeavor will foster closer collaboration and
more idea cross-pollination between the ML and battery modeling research communities [24].
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work is supported by Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) under the Career
Development Fund (C210112037).
References
[1]J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand. Issues and challenges facing rechargeable lithium batteries.
Nature , 414:359, November 2001.
[2]George E. Blomgren. The Development and Future of Lithium Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem.
Soc., 164(1):A5019, December 2016. Publisher: IOP Publishing.
[3]Rachel C. Kurchin, Eric Muckley, Lance Kavalsky, Vinay Hegde, Dhairya Gandhi, Xiaoyu
Sun, Matthew Johnson, Alan Edelman, James Saal, Christopher Vincent Rackauckas, Bryce
Meredig, Viral Shah, and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. ACED: Accelerated Computa-
tional Electrochemical systems Discovery. arXiv:2011.04426 [cond-mat] , November 2020.
arXiv: 2011.04426.
[4]Alejandro A. Franco, Alexis Rucci, Daniel Brandell, Christine Frayret, Miran Gaberscek,
Piotr Jankowski, and Patrik Johansson. Boosting Rechargeable Batteries R&D by Multiscale
Modeling: Myth or Reality? Chemical Reviews , 119(7):4569–4627, April 2019.
[5]Weihan Li, Monika Rentemeister, Julia Badeda, Dominik Jöst, Dominik Schulte, and Dirk Uwe
Sauer. Digital twin for battery systems: Cloud battery management system with online state-of-
charge and state-of-health estimation. Journal of Energy Storage , 30:101557, August 2020.
4[6]Jacqueline Sophie Edge, Simon O’Kane, Ryan Prosser, Niall D. Kirkaldy, Anisha N. Patel,
Alastair Hales, Abir Ghosh, Weilong Ai, Jingyi Chen, and Jason Jiang. Lithium Ion Battery
Degradation: What you need to know. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics , 2021. Publisher:
Royal Society of Chemistry.
[7]Kristen A. Severson, Peter M. Attia, Norman Jin, Nicholas Perkins, Benben Jiang, Zi Yang,
Michael H. Chen, Muratahan Aykol, Patrick K. Herring, Dimitrios Fraggedakis, Martin Z.
Bazant, Stephen J. Harris, William C. Chueh, and Richard D. Braatz. Data-driven prediction of
battery cycle life before capacity degradation. Nat Energy , 4(5):383–391, May 2019. Number:
5 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[8]Peter M. Attia, Kristen A. Severson, and Jeremy D. Witmer. Statistical Learning for Accu-
rate and Interpretable Battery Lifetime Prediction. Journal of The Electrochemical Society ,
168(9):090547, September 2021. Publisher: The Electrochemical Society.
[9]Valentin Sulzer, Peyman Mohtat, Antti Aitio, Suhak Lee, Yen T. Yeh, Frank Steinbacher,
Muhammad Umer Khan, Jang Woo Lee, Jason B. Siegel, Anna G. Stefanopoulou, and David A.
Howey. The challenge and opportunity of battery lifetime prediction from ﬁeld data. Joule ,
5(8):1934–1955, August 2021.
[10] Paula Fermín-Cueto, Euan McTurk, Michael Allerhand, Encarni Medina-Lopez, Miguel F.
Anjos, Joel Sylvester, and Gonçalo dos Reis. Identiﬁcation and machine learning prediction of
knee-point and knee-onset in capacity degradation curves of lithium-ion cells. Energy and AI ,
1:100006, August 2020.
[11] Antti Aitio and David Howey. Combining Non-Parametric and Parametric Models for Stable
and Computationally Efﬁcient Battery Health Estimation. volume 1, page V001T20A002,
Virtual, Online, October 2020. American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
[12] Jorn M. Reniers, Grietus Mulder, and David A. Howey. Review and Performance Comparison
of Mechanical-Chemical Degradation Models for Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. ,
166(14):A3189–A3200, 2019.
[13] Eric Prada, D. Di Domenico, Y . Creff, J. Bernard, Valérie Sauvant-Moynot, and François Huet.
A simpliﬁed electrochemical and thermal aging model of LiFePO4-graphite Li-ion batteries:
power and capacity fade simulations. Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 160(4):A616,
2013. Publisher: IOP Publishing.
[14] Christian Kupper, Björn Weißhar, Sascha Rißmann, and Wolfgang G. Bessler. End-of-Life
Prediction of a Lithium-Ion Battery Cell Based on Mechanistic Aging Models of the Graphite
Electrode. J. Electrochem. Soc. , 165(14):A3468, November 2018. Publisher: IOP Publishing.
[15] Aashutosh Mistry, Alejandro A. Franco, Samuel J. Cooper, Scott A. Roberts, and Venkatasubra-
manian Viswanathan. How Machine Learning Will Revolutionize Electrochemical Sciences.
ACS Energy Letters , pages 1422–1431, March 2021. Publisher: American Chemical Society.
[16] Valentin Sulzer, Scott G. Marquis, Robert Timms, Martin Robinson, and S. Jon Chapman.
Python Battery Mathematical Modelling (PyBaMM). Journal of Open Research Software ,
9(1):14, 2021.
[17] Adrien M. Bizeray, Jin–Ho Kim, Stephen R. Duncan, and David A. Howey. Identiﬁability and
Parameter Estimation of the Single Particle Lithium-Ion Battery Model. IEEE Transactions
on Control Systems Technology , 27(5):1862–1877, September 2019. Conference Name: IEEE
Transactions on Control Systems Technology.
[18] Saehong Park, Dylan Kato, Zach Gima, Reinhardt Klein, and Scott Moura. Optimal Exper-
imental Design for Parameterization of an Electrochemical Lithium-Ion Battery Model. J.
Electrochem. Soc. , 165(7):A1309–A1323, 2018.
[19] Samuel H. Rudy, Steven L. Brunton, Joshua L. Proctor, and J. Nathan Kutz. Data-driven
discovery of partial differential equations. Science Advances , 3(4):e1602614, April 2017.
Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science Section: Research Article.
[20] Muratahan Aykol, Chirranjeevi Balaji Gopal, Abraham Anapolsky, Patrick K. Herring, Bruis
van Vlijmen, Marc D. Berliner, Martin Z. Bazant, Richard D. Braatz, William C. Chueh, and
Brian D. Storey. Perspective—Combining Physics and Machine Learning to Predict Battery
Lifetime. J. Electrochem. Soc. , 168(3):030525, March 2021.
5[21] Jared Willard, Xiaowei Jia, Shaoming Xu, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar. Integrating
Scientiﬁc Knowledge with Machine Learning for Engineering and Environmental Systems.
arXiv:2003.04919 [physics, stat] , July 2021. arXiv: 2003.04919.
[22] Mark Asch, Marc Bocquet, and Maëlle Nodet. Data assimilation: methods, algorithms, and
applications . Number 11 in Fundamentals of algorithms. Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, Philadelphia, 2016.
[23] Aashutosh Mistry, Ankit Verma, Shashank Sripad, Rebecca Ciez, Valentin Sulzer, Ferran
Brosa Planella, Robert Timms, Yumin Zhang, Rachel Kurchin, Philipp Dechent, Weihan Li,
Samuel Greenbank, Zeeshan Ahmad, Dilip Krishnamurthy, Alexis M. Fenton, Kevin Tenny,
Prehit Patel, Daniel Juarez Robles, Paul Gasper, Andrew Colclasure, Artem Baskin, Corinne D.
Scown, Venkat R. Subramanian, Edwin Khoo, Srikanth Allu, David Howey, Steven DeCaluwe,
Scott A. Roberts, and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. A Minimal Information Set To Enable
Veriﬁable Theoretical Battery Research. ACS Energy Letters , pages 3831–3835, October 2021.
Publisher: American Chemical Society.
[24] Jenny A. Baker, Martin Beuse, Steven C. DeCaluwe, Linda W. Jing, Edwin Khoo, Shashank
Sripad, Ulderico Ulissi, Ankit Verma, Andrew A. Wang, Yen T. Yeh, Nicholas Yiu, David A.
Howey, and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. Fostering a Sustainable Community in Batteries.
ACS Energy Lett. , 5(7):2361–2366, July 2020.
6