Leveraging Machine Learning for Sustainable and
Self-sufﬁcient Energy Communities
Anthony Faustine
CeADAR, University College Dublin
Belﬁeld Ofﬁce Park, Unit 9, Clonskeagh, Dublin 4
anthony.faustine@ucd.ieLucas Pereira
ITI, LARSyS, Técnico Lisboa; Av.
Rovisco Pais, Lisboa 1000-268, Portugal
lucas.pereira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Daniel Ngondya
The University of Dodoma, Tanzania
Dodoma, Tanzania
dngondya@gmail.comLoubna Benabbou
University of Quebec, Canada
Quebec, Canada
loubna_benabbou@uqar.ca
Abstract
Community Energies (CEs) are the next-generation energy management techniques
that empowers citizens to interact with the energy market as self-consumers or
prosumers actively. Successful implementation of CEs will promote sustainable
energy production and consumption practices; thus, contributing to affordable
and clean energy (SDG7) and climate action (SDG 13). Despite the potential of
CEs, managing the overall power production and demand is challenging. This
is because power is generated, distributed and controlled by several producers,
each of which with different, and potentially conﬂicting, objectives. Thus, this
project will investigate the role of machine learning approaches in smartening CEs,
increasing energy awareness and enabling distributed energy resources planning
and management. The project implementation will be centered around proof of
concept development and capacity development in Africa.
1 Problem
In recent times, vast portions of the world have witnessed rapid increase in energy use due to urbaniza-
tion, economic growth and population increase. The rise in energy use is currently accounting for 40%
of global Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions, which pose challenges to climate and sustainability [ 1].
To address this, the Paris Agreement set forth an objective to reduce energy-related GHG emissions
by more than 70 percent by 2050 through massive deployment of Renewable Energy Sources (RES)
[2]. The use of RES that goes along with efﬁcient energy management strategies is likely to play a
signiﬁcant role in the heart of climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts [3].
Consequently, different countries adopt new approaches for the RES transition, focusing on engaging
communities towards sustainable and clean energy systems. In this context, a wide range of com-
munity energy (CE) systems are currently being implemented worldwide with European countries
at the forefront [ 4]. CEs are the next-generation energy management technique with distributed
generation, storage, delivery, and consumption enabling proactive consumers (prosumers) to transact
their energy as goods and services [ 5]. As decentralized and distributed RES-based systems, CEs
promote sustainable energy production and consumption practices, enabling customers to access a
wide range of alternative energy sources according to their preferences [ 6]. Simultaneously, CEs
can provide various beneﬁts such as creating a competitive energy market, reducing power outages
and network loss, increasing the overall efﬁciency of power systems, and supplementing alternative
energy sources according to user preferences [5, 7].
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.Implementing CEs in Africa’s rural areas will help meet Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) for
climate action (SDG13) and affordable and clean energy (SDG7). Consequently, enhanced access to
clean energy will help achieve equitable access to education (SDG4) and reduce inequality within and
among countries (SDG10). Even though CEs implementation in Africa can be challenging, Africa
presents a unique opportunity for proper planning and innovation, given the fact that there are not so
many legacy systems to integrate.
It should be noted that, for efﬁcient energy management and long-term reliable operation of the CEs,
it is necessary to monitor and estimate the amount of energy demand and predict the amount of
energy that will be generated. Efﬁcient energy management has the potential of scaling down capital
investment needed to provide sufﬁcient and reliable energy supply, which is the necessary condition
for facilitating the broad adoption of CEs and increasing the self-consumption of CEs. It will further
enable prosumers to coordinate their energy usage and prepare the buy and sell to balance the CEs
demand and supply. Managing the overall CE’s power production and demand is more challenging
since power is generated in a distributed manner and controlled by several producers. Moreover,
power generation is highly unpredictable as it depends on RES that is affected by weather conditions.
To this end, it is essential to investigate the role of data-driven and machine learning approaches in
smartening CEs, increasing energy awareness, and enabling distributed energy resources planning
and management.
2 Technical solution
In this project, we will focus on two speciﬁc objectives i) proof of concept development, ii) research
capacity development and awareness creation in developing countries. In the ﬁrst objective, the project
will investigate the value-propositions of data-driven and machine learning approaches in smartening
and enhancing energy-management practices in CEs. Speciﬁcally, we want to; understanding how
different data sources, including individual appliance consumption, could be leveraged to maximize
the self-consumption, reduce peak-demands while ensuring fair trading between the peers in CEs.
Secondly, we will explore machine learning strategies that could facilitate knowledge transfer from
CEs with quality data to CEs with poor-quality data, especially in developing countries. Ultimately,
this will enable us to establish the minimum data requirements for developing data-driven solutions
that can be deployed in resource-constraints environments.
In the second objective, the project seeks to build research capacity through knowledge transfer and
awareness creation. Several initiatives like Deep Learning Indab, Data science Africa and Black in
AI with support from big tech players like Google, Amazon, and Facebook are in place, focusing
on increasing African participation and contribution to the advances in AI and ML. However, little
emphasis has been given to the potential of these techniques in energy and climate change. Thus,
in this project, capacity development and speciﬁc awareness rising will revolve around the values,
capabilities, and limitations of the data-driven solution and machine learning techniques in energy
and climate change. This is expected to increase the number of AI-aware stakeholders involved in
energy research, decision-making, and policy-making from academia, government, and industry. We
are conﬁdent that for effective and successful uptake of AI research outputs and innovations, the
government, industries, and other relevant stakeholders in the energy sector must understand AI
better.
3 Impacts
The project’s medium to long-term goal is to introduce data-driven and machine learning innovation
to leverage the potential of CEs. The improved energy productivity in CESs that goes along with
efﬁcient energy consumption will make the energy sector more affordable, reliable, sustainable,
gender-inclusive, and climate-smart. The goal will be achieved by applying machine learning
techniques to smarten CEs and improve their energy management and the development of human-
capacity and awareness in the area of AI/ML and its application in energy and climate change.
Through-out the project life-cycle, it is expected that the expertise and knowledge from the North will
reinforce the research and development capacity in AI/ML and its application in energy and climate
change to African researchers. Consequently, it will improve the African partners’ capability to
2carry out advanced research and stimulate energy innovation that addresses sustainable development
(promoting SDG 17).
Moreover, knowledge transfer through capacity building in research and development will help attain
universal quality higher education and increase international visibility (SDG 4). This is expected to
establish a sustainable pipeline of talent and human development to meet the localized and global
needs (promoting SGD 1 and 8). In the long-run, we expect partners in Africa to continue producing
useful research for innovation in data-driven and machine learning solutions and their application
to energy, climate change, and other sustainability challenges. The government, industries, and key
stakeholders will support the effective up-scaling of current and future innovations and effectively
use these innovations.
4 Project implementation plan
The implementation plan for this project is organized into four works packages (WPs):
WP:1 Project preparation, baseline information, and stakeholder engagement. This WP aims
to identify existing approaches and initiatives (baseline information) and key stakeholders that will
be engaged throughout the project life-cycle. The baseline information is needed to measure the
output (immediate results) and outcome (Intermediate results). The qualitative and quantitative
techniques will be employed to collect baseline data on the current skill level and available personnel
with potential and interest of developing AI/machine learning skills, the type of infrastructure and
the existing gap, the nature of academia-industry-government collaboration in AI/machine learning,
especially in the energy sector in developing countries.
WP:2 Development of innovative AI/ML solution for enhanced energy management in CEs.
This project seeks to use existing data sources from our partner in Europe and expand the existing
research on robust machine-learning techniques for energy-disaggregation (Non-intrusive Load
Monitoring (NILM)) [ 8,9,10,11], demand-side management [ 12], and forecasting [ 13,14,15]
to develop solutions that can work in constrained environments. The project will also incoparate
human-computer interaction aspects as there is crucial gap between humans and AI [ 16].In Africa,
where the project is expected to be carried out, different data sources such as weather and RES data
will be used to validate the applicability of proposed techniques. Masters and Ph.D. students expected
to be enrolled in this project will support the development of the innovative data-driven solutions for
CEs.
WP:4 Capacity development and awareness creation. Building capacities of the research team
and key stakeholders is central to this project. Capacities will be built through the following methods:
(1) Curriculum development for Msc program 2) MSc, Ph.D., and Post-doc training. 3) Summer
school and exchange program. Development of the new curriculum will place more emphasis on
blending data-driven and machine learning concepts with RE and Energy Conservation so as to
ensure sustainability of consumption through monitoring, prediction and forecasting of demand and
production. The curriculum will also incorporate new delivery modes that harness skills development,
soft skills, creativity and innovations. To build a well-trained workforce that meets local and
international needs of AI with its application to energy conservation, the project seeks to support
training of MSc, Ph.D and postdoctoral studies. Scholars from partnering institutions will participate
in exchange programs to ensure development of holistic and climate-aware research ideas, innovations,
and solutions. The project will extend research results to key stakeholders through demonstrations and
presentations, social networks, websites, online learning platform, and local and national media. This
will increase awareness, create interest, and facilitate easy uptake of innovation by the government,
industries, and other relevant stakeholders.
WP 4: Operationalization of AI/machine learning applications through academia-government-
industry collaboration.
In this WP the project shall focus on strengthening Academia-Government-Industry linkage. One
of the many ways of ensuring this is enhanced mobility across the existing technological hubs,
incubators and AI/machine learning labs, co-design and co-creation, and co-evaluation of the results.
To this end, the project will use the following key methodological success factors: strong institutional
commitment to collaboration in research and capacity building that is backed by policy and regulatory
framework. North-South based knowledge sharing spirit that is expected to apply the best practices
to capitalize on strengths from either side and minimize the weaknesses and risk factors.
3References
[1]Sourav Khanna, Victor Becerra, Adib Allahham, Damian Giaouris, Jamie M. Foster, Keiron
Roberts, David Hutchinson, and Jim Fawcett. Demand response model development for smart
households using time of use tariffs and optimal control—The isle of wight Energy autonomous
community case study. Energies , 13(3):1–27, 2020.
[2]Richard J. Hewitt, Nicholas Bradley, Andrea Baggio Compagnucci, Carla Barlagne, Andrzej
Ceglarz, Roger Cremades, Margaret McKeen, Ilona M. Otto, and Bill Slee. Social innovation
in community energy in Europe: A review of the evidence. Frontiers in Energy Research ,
7(APR):1–27, 2019.
[3]Giuseppe Barone, Giovanni Brusco, Daniele Menniti, Anna Pinnarelli, Gaetano Polizzi, Nicola
Sorrentino, Pasquale Vizza, and Alessandro Burgio. How Smart Metering and Smart Charging
may Help a Local Energy Community in Collective Self-Consumption in Presence of Electric
Vehicles. Energies , 13(16):4163, 2020.
[4]Ibrahim Dincer and Azzam Abu-Rayash. Community energy systems. Energy Sustainability ,
pages 101–118, 2020.
[5]Wayes Tushar, Tapan Kumar Saha, Chau Yuen, David Smith, and H. Vincent Poor. Peer-
to-Peer Trading in Electricity Networks: An Overview. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid ,
11(4):3185–3200, 2020.
[6]Aura Caramizaru and Andreas Uihlein. Energy communities : an overview of energy and social
innovation . 2019.
[7]Juhar Abdella and Khaled Shuaib. Peer to peer distributed energy trading in smart grids: A
survey. Energies , 11(6):1560, June 2018.
[8]Anthony Faustine, Nerey Henry Mvungi, Shubi Kaijage, and Kisangiri Michael. A survey on
non-intrusive load monitoring methodies and techniques for energy disaggregation problem.
CoRR , abs/1703.00785, 2017.
[9]Anthony Faustine and Lucas Pereira. Improved appliance classiﬁcation in non-intrusive load
monitoring using weighted recurrence graph and convolutional neural networks. Energies ,
13(13):3374, July 2020.
[10] A. Faustine, L. Pereira, and C. Klemenjak. Adaptive weighted recurrence graphs for appliance
recognition in non-intrusive load monitoring. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , pages 1–1,
2020.
[11] Anthony Faustine, Lucas Pereira, Hafsa Bousbiat, and Shridhar Kulkarni. Unet-nilm: A deep
neural network for multi-tasks appliances state detection and power estimation in nilm. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring , NILM’20,
page 84–88, New York, NY , USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[12] K. L. López, C. Gagné, and M. Gardner. Demand-side management using deep learning for
smart charging of electric vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 10(3):2683–2691, 2019.
[13] Petros Iliadis, Stefanos Domalis, Athanasios Nesiadis, Konstantinos Atsonios, Spyridon Cha-
paloglou, Nikos Nikolopoulos, and Panagiotis Grammelis. Advanced energy management
system based on PV and load forecasting for load smoothing and optimized peak shaving of
islanded power systems. E3S Web of Conferences , 113:03001, 2019.
[14] Lucas Pereira and Jonathan Cavaleiro. On the value proposition of battery energy storage in
self-consumption only scenarios: A case-study in madeira island. In IECON 2019 - 45th Annual
Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society . IEEE, October 2019.
[15] Spyridon Chapaloglou, Athanasios Nesiadis, Petros Iliadis, Konstantinos Atsonios, Nikos
Nikolopoulos, Panagiotis Grammelis, Christos Yiakopoulos, Ioannis Antoniadis, and Emmanuel
Kakaras. Smart energy management algorithm for load smoothing and peak shaving based on
load forecasting of an island’s power system. Applied Energy , 238:627–642, March 2019.
4[16] Denise J. Wilkins, Ruzanna Chitchyan, and Mark Levine. Peer-to-peer energy markets: Un-
derstanding the values of collective and community trading. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, April 2020.
5