ACED: A CCELERATED COMPUTATIONAL ELECTRO -
CHEMICAL SYSTEMS DISCOVERY
Rachel C. Kurchin, Lance Kavalsky, Xiaoyu Sun, Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
frkurchin,seansun,venkatv g@andrew.cmu.edu
Eric Muckley, Vinay Hegde, James Saal & Bryce Meredig
Citrine Informatics
Redwood City, CA 94063, USA
femuckley, vhegde, jsaal, bryce g@citrine.io
Dhairya Gandhi & Viral Shah
Julia Computing
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
fdhairya, viral g@juliacomputing.com
Matthew Johnson, Alan Edelman, & Christopher Vincent Rackauckas
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
fmattsj, edelman, crackauc g@mit.edu
ABSTRACT
Large-scale electriﬁcation is vital to addressing the climate crisis, but many en-
gineering challenges remain to fully electrifying both the chemical industry and
transportation. In both of these areas, new electrochemical materials and systems
will be critical, but developing these systems currently relies heavily on compu-
tationally expensive ﬁrst-principles simulations as well as human-time-intensive
experimental trial and error. We propose to develop an automated workﬂow that
accelerates these computational steps by introducing both automated error han-
dling in generating the ﬁrst-principles training data as well as physics-informed
machine learning surrogates to further reduce computational cost. It will also
have the capacity to include automated experiments “in the loop” in order to dra-
matically accelerate the overall materials discovery pipeline.
1 E LECTROCHEMISTRY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Electriﬁcation of virtually every energy-consuming sector is critical in the ﬁght against climate
change, as it will enable society to rely on carbon-free energy sources such as solar and wind.
Increased performance and reduced cost of electrochemical technologies will be key to this elec-
triﬁcation process. Many are already familiar with phenomena such as “range anxiety”, as well as
sticker shock for electric vehicles. Perhaps less familiar are the large swaths of the chemical industry
that rely on extreme conditions (heat and pressure) produced by burning fossil fuels for large-scale
synthesis of chemicals that are essential for fertilizers, steel, cement and other aspects of modern
life that many of us take for granted.
To meet the technoeconomic targets posed by these challenges, novel materials and systems will
need to be designed. In this project, we propose to develop a generalizable and automated workﬂow
for discovering and developing these materials and systems. It will have the capability to build the
necessary ﬁrst-principles models and use their results to train machine learning surrogates that can
be evaluated orders magnitude more quickly. The results of these models can be used in a series of
1coarser models to bridge from the atomic to the device scales and evaluate performance potential
in a real system, including the possibility for an “in-the-loop” automated experimental evaluation.
Using sequential learning, we can then select the next candidate from a speciﬁed design space and
proceed through the workﬂow as many times as necessary to meet target performance speciﬁcations.
2 P ROPOSED WORKFLOW
2.1 O VERVIEW
Figure 1: ML-aided materials discovery workﬂow. See Section 2.1 for a detailed description.
The workﬂow we envision is summarized at a high level in Figure 1. The ﬁrst step (upper left) is
to generate relevant atomic structures for the candidate molecules/materials. Initially, these will be
fed into a ﬁrst-principles simulation engine such as density functional theory (DFT) or a quantum
chemistry code. These calculations result in predicted materials properties that serve as parameters
in a larger-scale model (such as one describing chemical kinetics of catalysis or the operation of a
battery), from which device performance can be predicted. If the workﬂow is purely computational,
this result will determine if the search has succeeded or whether a new candidate needs to be identi-
ﬁed. If an automated experiment is “in the loop,” then this serves as a decision point for whether an
experiment should be done. Assuming performance criteria have not yet been met, a new candidate
material/molecule is selected using a sequential learning algorithm, and structures are generated to
proceed through the loop again.
Once enough ﬁrst-principles simulations have been run, the resulting data can be used to train an ML
surrogate model to speed up candidate evaluation. A separate surrogate can be trained to accelerate
the device modeling step.
In addition to building these ML surrogates, we are also placing emphasis on automating any step
in this workﬂow that currently requires human intervention, with the ultimate goal of the entire ma-
terials discovery loop being autonomous. For example, running forward models (orange boxes in
Figure 1) often requires, in addition to substantial computational resources, multiple steps of human
decision-making, either to determine which speciﬁc calculations to do, or to resolve convergence
errors arising from parameter choices. A signiﬁcant portion of this project is developing an auto-
mated DFT workﬂow that can proceed entirely without this type of human input and hence eliminate
associated delays.
The machine learning models for this work (with the exception of the design space search described
below, for which a large body of code in Python already existed) take advantage of the Julia pro-
gramming language’s unique combination of ease of use and best-in-class performance, as well as
the existence of a robust language-wide automatic differentiation system (Innes, 2019). In partic-
2ular, we use the Flux machine learning library (Innes, 2018) and the DifferentialEquations.jl pack-
age (Rackauckas & Nie, 2017) extensively in this work.
While the strict data-dependencies of the workﬂow would traditionally require the all steps of the
simulation process to be done sequentially, we are breaking the ﬂow by training ML surrogates of
the microkinetic models (MKM) during the ﬁrst-principles simulations. This allows us to amortize
the training time during the previous step of the process and thus receive the beneﬁts of the ML
augmentation while masking its cost. We plan to develop a surrogate of the whole MKM analysis
process, i.e. a surrogate from the materials properties directly to the device performance prediction,
so that the moment the DFT calculations are completed the neural network will bypass the stiff
ill-conditioned kinetic simulation and directly predict the outcomes.
Search of the design space and candidate selection will be carried out using Citrine’s Citrination
cloud-based machine learning engine. Communication with Citrination will primarily be executed
using the Citrination Python API (Citrine). Modeling of the design space will be performed using
lolo (Citrine Informatics), Citrine’s custom random forest regression algorithm which incorporates
uncertainty estimates. Material candidates will be chosen based a strategy which balances greedy
and exploratory selection strategies including maximum likelihood of improvement (MLI), maxi-
mum expected improvement (MEI), and maximum uncertainty (MU) (Ling et al., 2017). This pro-
cessed will be repeated for each material candidate of interest to enable iterative sequential learning
of material properties across the design space.
3 C ASE STUDIES
3.1 P HASE I: E LECTROCHEMICAL NITROGEN REDUCTION
The nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) is central to global food supply as it produces ammonia, a
critical component in fertilizers. Roughly 80% of the nitrogen in an average human body today
has been produced through the Haber-Bosch process (Howarth, 2008), the state-of-the-art industrial
method for NRR. However, this process takes place at extreme pressure ( 10MPa) and temperature
(400-500oC), conditions that require burning fossil fuels to achieve.
A promising alternative approach is electrochemical nitrogen reduction, where the activation en-
ergy currently provided by heat and pressure is instead supplied by electric voltage. This approach
currently faces obstacles due to low activity and selectivity of catalysts. In this work, we will inves-
tigate two promising catalyst design spaces with potential to surmount these obstacles: single-atom
catalysts and multi-principal-element alloys.
To substitute for DFT calculations to obtain binding energies for NRR intermediates with our candi-
date catalysts, we make use of atomic graph convolutional neural nets. This concept was originally
popularized by Xie & Grossman (2018) for bulk crystals, and we are developing the AtomicGraph-
Nets.jl package (currently available on GitHub, eventually in the Julia Package Registry) as a ﬂexible
implementation for crystals and molecules. In support of this, we are also developing ChemistryFea-
turization.jl to provide a uniﬁed interface for building graphs from a variety of input structure ﬁles,
and assigning feature matrices using data from several online databases.
3.2 P HASE II: N OVEL LIBATTERY ELECTROLYTES
Achieving higher speciﬁc energy (i.e. energy per unit mass) and power in batteries, as well as higher
energy and power density (per volume), is critical to further expanding electric transportation (Sripad
& Viswanathan, 2017) as well as to eventually electrify ﬂight (Fredericks et al., 2018). A promising
way to achieve these targets is by shifting to metallic lithium as the anode. Removing the typical
graphite anode reduces both weight and volume and increases voltage and power capabilities, but
introduces challenges due to the tendency of lithium to form dendrites during charging. These
dendrites can reach across the separator and short the device, reducing cycle life, and in the worst
cases, cause dangerous ﬁres.
Critical to ameliorating these issues is the development of novel battery electrolytes that can block
dendrites from growing. Typically, screening of candidate electrolyte molecules makes use of com-
putationally intensive quantum chemistry simulations. However, there are several promising ML
3approaches to building fast and accurate surrogates for such calculations. We are in the process of
building the Julia language port of the popular DeepChem machine learning package (Ramsundar
et al.). These property prediction methods will be used in conjunction with pseudo 2-dimensional
porous electrode models for predicting the performance of lithium metal batteries.
4 C ONCLUSION
Rapid materials discovery is critical in variety of climate change challenges, including and especially
electrifying the chemical and transportation industries. Given the urgency of the climate challenge,
we no longer have the luxury of time to go about materials discovery in the “traditional” paradigm.
Machine learning approaches along with automation of both simulation and experimentation have
great potential to dramatically accelerate the cycle of learning and help us to discover and develop
the new materials and systems that will be essential in engineering a green future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the ARPA-E DIFFERENTIATE program for ﬁnancial support of this
work.
REFERENCES
Citrine. Citrination Python API. https://github.com/CitrineInformatics/
python-citrination-client .
Citrine Informatics. lolo machine learning library. https://github.com/
CitrineInformatics/lolo .
William L Fredericks, Shashank Sripad, Geoffrey C Bower, and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan.
Performance metrics required of next-generation batteries to electrify vertical takeoff and landing
(VTOL) aircraft. ACS Energy Letters , 3(12):2989–2994, 2018.
Robert W Howarth. Coastal nitrogen pollution: a review of sources and trends globally and region-
ally. Harmful algae , 8(1):14–20, 2008.
Michael Innes. Don’t unroll adjoint: differentiating SSA-form programs. arXiv:1810.07951 [cs] ,
March 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.07951 . arXiv: 1810.07951.
Mike Innes. Flux: Elegant machine learning with Julia. Journal of Open Source Software , 3(25):
602, 2018. ISSN 2475-9066. doi: 10.21105/joss.00602.
Julia Ling, Maxwell Hutchinson, Erin Antono, Sean Paradiso, and Bryce Meredig. High-
dimensional materials and process optimization using data-driven experimental design with well-
calibrated uncertainty estimates. Integrating Materials and Manufacturing Innovation , 6(3):207–
217, 2017.
Christopher Rackauckas and Qing Nie. DifferentialEquations.jl – a performant and feature-rich
ecosystem for solving differential equations in Julia. Journal of Open Research Software , 5(1),
2017.
B Ramsundar, P Eastman, E Feinberg, J Gomes, K Leswing, A Pappu, M Wu, and V Pande.
Deepchem: Democratizing deep-learning for drug discovery, quantum chemistry, materials sci-
ence and biology.
Shashank Sripad and Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan. Performance metrics required of next-
generation batteries to make a practical electric semi truck. ACS Energy Letters , 2(7):1669–1673,
2017.
Tian Xie and Jeffrey C. Grossman. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks for an accurate and
interpretable prediction of material properties. Physical Review Letters , 120(14):145301, 2018.
ISSN 10797114. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.145301.
4