A NLP-Based Analysis of Alignment of Organizations’
Climate-Related Risk Disclosures with Material Risks
and Metrics
Elham Kheradmand
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Montreal
Canada, QC H3T 1J4
elham.kheradmand.nezhad@umontreal.caDidier Serre
Clearsum
Canada, QC, H2C 3E4
dserre@clearsum.com
Manuel Morales
University of Montreal
manuel.morales@umontreal.caCedric B Robert
Clearsum
cbrobert@clearsum.com
Abstract
The Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) establishes standards to
guide the disclosures of material sustainability and ESG (Environment, Social,
Governance)-related information across industries. The availability of quality,
comparable and decision-useful information is required to assess risks and oppor-
tunities later integrated into ﬁnancial decision-making. Particularly, standardized,
industry-speciﬁc climate risk metrics and topics can support these efforts. SASB’s
latest climate risk technical bulletin introduces three climate-related risks that are
ﬁnancially material - physical, transition and regulatory risks - and maps these
across industries. The main objective of this work is to create a framework that can
analyze climate related risk disclosures using an AI-based tool that automatically
extracts and categorizes climate-related risks and related metrics from company
disclosures based on SASB’s latest climate risk guidance. This process will help
with automating large-scale analysis and add much-needed transparency vis-a-vis
the current state of climate-related disclosures, while also assessing how far along
companies are currently disclosing information on climate risks relevant to their
industry. As it stands, this much needed type of analysis is made mostly manually
or using third-party metrics, often opaque and biased, as proxies. In this work, we
will ﬁrst create a climate risk dictionary that will be trained on a large amount of
climate risk text. By combining climate risk keywords in this dictionary with recent
advances in natural language processing (NLP), we will then be able to quantita-
tively and qualitatively compare climate risk information in different sectors and
industries using a novel climate risk score that will be based on SASB standards.
1 Introduction
The importance of effective climate-related ﬁnancial risk information and risk communication is
crucial to both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial actors. In its latest Global Risks Report, the World
Economic Forum again identiﬁed climate-related risks among the highest likelihood and impact
risks of the next ten years [1]. Several frameworks and standards were released to support the
development of decision-relevant, climate-related risk disclosures, including Task Force on Climate-
related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB), Carbon
Disclosure Project (CDP) and Climate Disclosure Sustainability Board (CDSB) to name a few. While
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2021.their overall aim is to improve the availability of quality, comparable and decision-useful information
to be integrated into ﬁnancial decision-making, the reality is that disclosures around material risks are
not currently readily available in a standardized format, nor are they systematically reported given
the voluntary nature of climate-related disclosures in most jurisdictions. In fact, a review of over 800
annual reports from TCFD-supporting companies showed evidence of cherry picking in the selection
of corporate disclosures, which generally ignored material risk information, with little improvement
in the quality of disclosures following TCFD implementation [2]. Thus, the availability and high
level of transparency of climate-related reporting is necessary to assess climate-related exposures and
risks, reduce information asymmetry and enable the efﬁcient allocation of ﬁnancial resources.
Assessing and managing exposures related to climate risks and opportunities requires industry-tailored
disclosures as climate change is likely to materialize differently across industries. As such, SASB’s
2021 Climate Risk Technical Bulletin [3] aims to address one of the most commonly cited challenges
in implementing TCFD recommendations: the lack of standardized, industry-speciﬁc climate risk
metrics [4]. While a standardized climate-related disclosure framework has yet to be developed,
SASB is recognized as a leader in sustainability-related frameworks, and is positioning itself to play a
key role in the future of standardization of climate-related disclosure. It is therefore critical to consider
SASB carefully. Further, the expectation of an industry-speciﬁc climate-risk disclosure framework
like SASB’s ESG disclosure framework is highly relevant as it could be used as “a practical tool for
companies to use when implementing the TCFD’s principles-based recommendations”1.
The framework proposed by SASB focuses on three categories of climate risks, namely the physical
effects of climate change (physical), transition to a low-carbon, resilient economy (transition), and
regulatory risks. It also highlights the climate risk categories most relevant and material to each of
SASB’s 77 SICS industries to create a map of the industries impacted by the various climate risk
categories. Using an AI-powered tool, this proposed project will thus make use of the newest NLP
technology to review all publicly available disclosures for selected companies, and assess the degree
to which past and current disclosures are consistent with the climate risk category mapping presented
in SASB’s 2021 Technical Bulletin [3]. The main goal of this project is to bring additional clarity on
the current state of climate risk reporting in order to improve and increase reporting of climate-related
risk ﬁnancial information.
Climate-related corporate disclosures are relied upon by numerous stakeholders, including investors
and ﬁnancial institutions, to regularly assess associated risks, opportunities and impacts linked to their
investment, lending and/or insurance portfolios. They may also be used by ﬁnancial supervisors and
regulatory authorities for prudential purposes. The proposed project will be relevant to investors and
ﬁnancial participants alike as it will help develop a process for determining whether corporations are
reporting and sharing climate-related information deemed relevant and material within their industry.
This process may also inform corporations themselves on the climate risk categories that may merit
further attention in corporate disclosures. Some industry benchmarking may be performed to provide
a more holistic view of the state of material disclosures among industry peers, and to assess the gap
between a particular corporation relative to its peers. Further regional segmentation over time may
be pursued. Similarly, regulators and policymakers may also beneﬁt from this work to assess the
current state of industry-speciﬁc climate risk disclosures. Finally, the outcome of this project may
also beneﬁt frameworks like SASB in better understanding alignment with their industry standards.
More speciﬁcally, the use of AI and machine learning applied to climate risk can help with the
automated analysis of a high volume of company disclosures. Furthermore, by specializing (open-
source) NLP algorithms to ESG domains, we seek to enable the extraction of climate-relevant
information (thus reducing the dependency on commercial data providers) which takes us one step
closer towards increasing overall transparency. Recently, two types of methodologies have been
used to extract climate risk information from company text data such as disclosures, news, and
earning calls: 1) traditional, and 2) AI/statistical-based approaches. The traditional approach involves
classifying text based on the existence of predeﬁned related keywords [5]. It thus only considers the
existence of keywords in a document. In the context of climate change, which is fast-evolving and
complex, keyword-based models are not adequate, and require context and interpretation to detect
topic patterns which can be implicit and sometimes ambiguous. On the other hand, a statistical-based
approach has been used to create bigram to classify text as climate opportunity, physical risk, and
regulatory risk [6]. Both approaches are not very good at extracting and measuring contextualized
1SASB Climate Risk Technical Bulletin [3]
2information like the one present in disclosures. Recent advances in NLP techniques and AI, can
be now leveraged and existing capabilities to extract climate-related risk information have been
improved substantially [7]. For instance, a BERT model2classiﬁed pairs of sentences to physical
and transition risks in addition to non-climate related data. On the other hand, one downside is
that supervised classiﬁcation models need a large amount of labeled data, particularly to cover the
distribution of non-climate risk related data.
To address these limitations, we propose a combination of both keyword and context based approaches
to increase the accuracy of the classiﬁcation model and reduce data labelization tasks for non-climate
risk data. In order to do this, we start by developing a climate risk dictionary (see Appendix A.1)
which is trained on climate risk corpus to cover a high number of both unigrams and bigrams. This is
the ﬁrst contribution of our work. In previous works, only 58 climate related unigram keywords are
used [8] and Sautner et. al [6] use only bigrams. In this work , we construct both unigram and bigram
keywords which are speciﬁcally trained from climate risk text data, such as climate risk disclosures
and guidance. To the best of our knowledge, this work will be the ﬁrst AI-based tool applied onto
SASB’s Climate Technical Bulletin [3].
The dictionary and the language models are the building blocks of a classiﬁcation task which is the
central component of our contribution. We set up a classiﬁcation task (see Appendix A.2) where
the objective is to classify a given text according to four categories: physical risk, transition risk,
regulatory risk and non-climate related. To train and validate the model the data set (see Appendix
A.2) is extracted from disclosures found in annual reports as well as sustainability and climate reports,
such as TCFD, corporate social responsibility, and ESG reports. We do this for the eleven sectors
deﬁned in the SASB ﬁnancial impact channels. After the validation of models, in the ﬁnal analysis,
we apply the classiﬁcation models to disclosures which cover all SASB’s 77 SICS industries. The
result of the models helps us to answer the questions if speciﬁc language is used in explanation of
climate risk in each industry or sector in addition to if companies disclose material climate risk,
topics, and metrics in their reports.
2 Expected Results
The main objective of this work is to create a framework to analyze climate related risk disclosures
based on SASB’s climate risk bulletin. In that regard, we expect to present:
•validation metrics (accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score) for the classiﬁcation BERT model
compared to other models in the following two areas:
–Training and testing models in climate risk classiﬁcations for each one of the eleven
sectors from SASB ﬁnancial channel separately;
–Training and testing one model for all sectors,
•speciﬁc climate risk dictionaries for each sector and industry to show how differently
companies explain their climate risks. The dictionaries will include unigram and bigram
words,
•a new climate risk score that reﬂects the presence of disclosures in reports aligned with
SASB’s climate risk categories. It is in terms of the existence of three climate risks which is
hinged on Table 2 “SASB CLIMATE RISK MAP” in SASB climate risk technical bulletin
2021 [3]. We also count the number of sentences for each type of climate risk and take it to
account in the climate risk score.
•an analysis of the change of the score over time by sector, industry and region will also be
conducted. We visualize the evolution of SASB framework alignment using the climate risk
score.
•a comparison of our results with a ﬁrm-speciﬁc climate risk exposure in the literature [9]. We
check if there is a correlation between our climate risk score and the climate risk exposure.
2One of the state-of-the-art model in NLP is Bidirectional, Encoder, Representations from Transformers
(BERT) developed by Google [8].
3Acknowledgment
We gratefully thank Malte Hessenius for his help through the mentorship program for NeurIPS 2021.
References
[1] McLennan, Marsh. (2021) The Global Risks Report 2021 16th Edition.
[2] Bingler, J. A., Kraus, M., & Leippold, M. (2021). Cheap Talk and Cherry-Picking: What ClimateBert has to
say on Corporate Climate Risk Disclosures. Available at SSRN .
[3] SASB, (2021) Sustainability Accounting Standards Board Climate Risk Technical Bulletin 2021 Edition
[4] Nisanci, D. A. (2021). FSB Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. In World Scientiﬁc
Encyclopedia of Climate Change: Case Studies of Climate Risk, Action, and Opportunity 3:3-8.
[5] Doran, K. L., & Quinn, E. L. (2008). Climate change risk disclosure: A sector by sector analysis of SEC
10-K ﬁlings from 1995-2008. N CJ Int’l L. & Com. Reg. ,34, 721.
[6] Sautner, Z., van Lent, L., Vilkov, G., & Zhang, R. (2020). Firm-level climate change exposure. Available at
SSRN 3642508.
[7] Kölbel, J. F., Leippold, M., Rillaerts, J., & Wang, Q. (2020). Ask BERT: How regulatory disclosure of
transition and physical climate risks affects the CDS term structure. Available at SSRN 3616324.
[8] Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
[9] Berkman, H., Jona, J., & Soderstrom, N. S. (2019). Firm-speciﬁc climate risk and market valuation.
Available at SSRN 2775552.
[10] Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. D. (2014, October). Glove: Global vectors for word representation.
In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) (pp.
1532-1543).
[11] Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in
vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781.
A Appendix
A.1 Climate Risk Dictionary
The aforementioned dictionary is constructed by training customized climate risk word embeddings
on climate related risk documents from the TCFD knowledge hub3. To do so, we also created an
automated web scraping tool to download climate risk documents from multiple, publicly available
online sources. We automate the extraction and text clean-up processes sourced from downloaded
documents using python scripts. On that corpus, we train a word embedding model using GloVe4
[10] on the climate risk related data, which is approximately 30 M tokens with 400 K unique words.
The GloVe model has an advantage over the Word2Vec [11] model as it considers the frequency of
words over the entire corpus. As a result, in the dictionary, we can consider the speciﬁc vocabulary
and expressions which are used to disclose information related to climate risk. The trained GloVe
model contains both unigrams and bigrams.
We then initialize a list of unigram and bigram keywords for each of the three categories of climate
risk in the SASB’s technical Bulletin [3], namely physical, transition and regulatory risks. Two sets
of similar keywords are found based on cosine similarity of the keywords with 1) the trained climate
risk GloVe and 2) a pretrained GloVe model5. As an example, for physical risk, the initial unigram
keyword was ‘ drought ’, which subsequently was associated with ’ frequency intensity ’, ’volatility
weather ’, ’extreme catastrophic ’, ’storm ’, ’wildﬁre ’, ’heat waves ’, ’intensity ﬂood ’, ’increased
frequency ’, ’inundated ﬂood ’ on our trained dictionary and ’ famine ’, ’devastating ’, ’plagued ’,
’severe ’, ’shortage ’ in the pretrained GloVe vocabulary. In our climate risk dictionary, we only keep
3https://www.tcfdhub.org/
4Global Vectors for Word Representation
5glove.6B - Wikipedia 2014 + Gigaword 5 (https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/)
4the similar words from the pretrained model that exist in our trained GloVe model. This dictionary is
the main building block for our classiﬁcation model.
A.2 Classiﬁcation: Dataset and Methodology
We set up a text classiﬁcation task according to four categories: physical risk, transition risk, regulatory
risk and non-climate related. We do this for eleven sectors as deﬁned in the SASB ﬁnancial impact
channels. The following gives a description of the methodology used in this classiﬁcation task.
For our training and validation data set, we pick subsets of disclosures of North American and
European companies which disclose consistent with TCFD or SASB guidance. This choice is made
on the reasonable hypothesis that companies that are a TCFD or a SASB supporter may be more
advanced in terms of climate-related disclosures. Another criteria in our selection is to include
companies that cover all 11 sectors in SASB ﬁnancial impact channels6to ensure we cover the wide
range of keywords speciﬁc to each sector7since these are the categories we are classifying.
Annual and sustainability reports of publicly-listed companies are readily available and can be
downloaded from online sources. These reports are typically either in PDF or HTML format. As
part of the project, we develop python scripts to extract and clean up text from these reports. To
detect climate risk related text, our scripts ﬁrst split the data into paragraphs. We assumed that each
paragraph would generally cover a unique topic.
We deﬁne a relevance score for a term by relating the frequency of a word in one report to a ratio of
length of the paragraph over the length of the entire report. We consider a weight for each keyword
with the inverse document frequency in the entire gathered text from disclosures for the speciﬁc sector.
Using the relevance score with a predeﬁned threshold, we retrieve climate risk related paragraphs
which represents a ﬁrst ﬁlter in the construction of our data set. Indeed, ﬁltering the text based on
predeﬁned words in the dictionary allows us to exclude the parts of reports that are not related to
climate risk. To create the training data, we are not required to label a variety of non-climate related
text, which is a challenging task to cover its vast distribution. In our experiment, the ﬁltering excluded
around 25% of paragraphs in some reports. Therefore, in our data set, although the non-climate
related labeled data might have mutual words with climate risk labeled but since the context is not
related to climate risk we label it as non-climate related. This helps the model to distinguish between
the classes better.
To prepare the data for labeling, we concatenate the ﬁltered text in a single report and then split it
again into pairs of sentences as it is done in the previous work [7]. This makes the labelization easier
and there is no need to cut some text as BERT is limited to only 512 tokens. The pairs of sentences
are labeled by climate-risk analysts to three categories of climate risk in addition to non-climate
related risk. In our labelization, we consider the sector and industry of the company which we get
inspired by “SASB climate-related disclosure topics and metrics by Industry”8.
We train a BERT model and ﬁnetune it on the dataset to be able to apply the model for detecting and
classifying climate risks from disclosures for large volume companies. Then, in order to compare
the performance of the model, we also train other models such as tﬁdf-vectorizer. In this work, it is
important for us to know how the performance of models would be different if we train a speciﬁc
model for a sector rather than a single model for all sectors. This helps us to answer the question,
“do companies in different sectors or industries use different language to express their climate risk?”.
This is based on “SASB climate-related disclosure topics and metrics by Industry”, SASB climate
risk deﬁnition and categorization, and the materiality which are speciﬁc for each industry.
6Table 2 in SASB climate risk technical bulletin [3]
7based on Table 3 in SASB climate risk technical bulletin [3])
8Table 3 in SASB climate risk technical bulletin [3])
5