Guided Transformer Network for Detecting Methane
Emissions in Sentinel-2 Satellite Imagery
Satish Kumar
University of California Santa Barbara
satishkumar@ucsb.eduWilliam Kingwill
Orbio Earth
william@orbio.earth
Rozanne Mouton
Orbio Earth
zani@orbio.earthWojciech Adamczyk
ETH Zurich
wojtekadamczyk3@gmail.comRobert Huppertz
Orbio Earth
robert@orbio.earth
Evan Sherwin
Stanford University
evands@stanford.edu
Abstract
Methane (CH 4) is the chief contributor to global climate change and its mitigation
is targeted by the EU, US and jurisdictions worldwide [ 2]. Recent studies have
shown that imagery from the multi-spectral instrument on Sentinel-2 satellites
is capable of detecting and estimating large methane emissions. However, most
of the current methods rely on temporal relations between a ratio of shortwave-
infrared spectra and assume relatively constant ground conditions, and availability
of ground information on when there was no methane emission on site. To address
such limitations we propose a guided query-based transformer neural network
architecture, that will detect and quantify methane emissions without dependence
on temporal information. The guided query aspect of our architecture is driven by a
Sentinel Enhanced Matched Filter ( SEMF ) approach, also discussed in this paper.
Our network uses all 12 spectral channels of Sentinel-2 imagery to estimate ground
terrain and detect methane emissions. No dependence on temporal data makes it
more robust to changing ground and terrain conditions and more computationally
efficient as it reduces the need to process historical time-series imagery to compute
a single date emissions analysis.
1 Introduction
Methane (CH 4) is estimated to contribute 20% of global warming induced by greenhouse gasses
[14] with a Global Warming Potential (GWP) 86 times higher than carbon dioxide (CO 2) in a 20 year
period [ 18]. The longstanding greenhouse gas has a mean atmospheric residence of 7.9 years [ 17]
and its presence in the atmosphere has been increasing since the industrial revolution [ 1]. The annual
growth rate of CH 4plateaued between 1999 and 2006, but started increasing again in 2007 [ 20].
Causes of this variable growth rate are highly debated, attributing the sporadic behavior to the natural
gas industry, emission from wetlands, and changes in the methane lifetime [ 19,26,27,25,33]. The
increases in atmospheric CH 4have prompted governments to enact regulations and action plans such
as the ‘U.S. Methane Emissions Reduction Action Plan’ in 2021 and the ‘Global Methane Pledge
Energy Pathway’ in 2022 to curb CH 4emission [ 2,21]. Accurately identifying and tracking the
contribution of various sources to the methane budget will be paramount to enforce these regulations.
Given the strong potential of satellite-based instruments to deliver high-frequency data on global
scales and even remote and hard-to-access regions, recent research has depicted the potentials of
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2021.Figure 1: Qualitative visualization of SEMF intermediate steps and final estimation.
deploying methane emissions analysis on public, global-mapping, multi-spectral instruments like
the ESA Sentinel-2 mission [ 34,3,8,22,3]. Most previous Sentinel-2-based methane analysis
approaches use similar approaches to the methane column retrieval method in [ 34], building large
parts of signal exploitation on an analysis of temporal deviation between times of excessive methane
concentrations in the atmosphere and times without, merged with ratios between methane-sensitive
and less-methane-sensitive bands. While this method, and variations of it [ 5] have revolutionized
capabilities of detecting methane emissions with public satellite data, the strong dependency on
time-series analysis of spectral reflectance data expose the approach to risky assumptions on (a)
knowing when emissions did not exist and (b) temporal albedo stability of the background - that the
albedo of a certain area stays constant over time. In return, these assumptions lead to high amounts
of false positives, especially in areas with heterogeneous, temporally deviating land cover [34, 36].
To overcome shortcomings of time-series based methane analytics methods, we propose a deeper
exploitation of signals from other non-methane-sensitive spectral bands of Sentinel-2 multi-spectral
data. Given both, the recent successes of enhance match filters for methane signal processing
[31,6,16,32] and progresses in using Machine Learning models for methane emissions analysis [ 16],
we hereby propose a 2-step methodology to generate (1) a novel Sentinel Enhanced Match Filter
(SEMF) algorithm and (2) an integration of SEMF into a Transformer-based Convolutional Neural
Network architecture [ 4,10] as shown in Figure 2. Using the full spectral response captured by
Sentinel-2 instruments, we expect the SEMF to support Signal to Noise separation by classifying
confusing and hard-to-detect land cover types, artifacts and temporal deviations, such as water
bodies, dark green vegetation, calcite, and white painted roofs which are never considered in current
band/channel ratio method. Using these classes, SEMF computes statistical properties for each class
separately for the whitening of background pixels.
2 Approach
The proposed approach is a transformer [ 35] based neural network architecture with a SEMF
guidance. The input to the network is B1-B12 bands from Sentinel-2 Level 1C data [ 23]. The output
is a segmentation mask that is used with a radiative transfer model for methane emissions analysis.
The overall architecture (Figure 2) presents 2 feature extraction blocks (ResNet [ 9]) as shown in
Figure 2, that will extract useful features from both, an input RGB image and a stack of B1-B12 bands
from Sentinel-2 Level 1C data [ 23]. While the singled-out RGB image will provide information
about land cover (e.g. Urban areas), the full B1-B12 stack provides additional land cover feature
extraction (e.g. water bodies) while also capturing information about methane presence. Extracted
features will be projected in a common subspace via a MLP [ 29] and passed on to the transformer
encoder network along with positional information of each pixel in the image as shown in Figure 2.
The output attention map [ 35] from the transformer encoder along with project features are passed
onto the transformer decoder. The decoder network will use our SEMF to generate a query of the
potential methane emission sites. The SEMF is discussed in more detail Section 2.2.
2.1 Dataset
We will be training and testing the proposed network on a mix of large-eddy based methane plume
simulation data (synthetic data) [ 24] and single-blind release, human-labelled data [ 28]. The synthetic
data includes images that contain simulated methane emissions on different types of background
terrain. Each image is be a 10km×10kmtile with 12 channels at different spatial resolutions per
pixel. Next to the simulation data, we propose model validation to happen on manually selected
2Figure 2: Our proposed transformer based Neural Network architecture, SEMF is one of the most
critical block of it presented in current proposal
emissions data from controlled ground releases [ 28]. The labels used in training corresponding to
each multi-spectral image will be a binary segmentation mask (methane, no-methane) with the same
spatial dimension as the input image. Along with that, we have a concentration mask, representing
the concentration of methane per pixel in the mol/m2.
2.2 Sentinel Enhanced Matched Filter (SEMF)
SEMF is an essential component of our proposed architecture. The SEMF model is used to
generate refined queries for our transformer decoder network, leading to quicker convergence of our
model. SEMF is inspired by a deterministic, linear match-filtering approach of finding CH 4[16,31].
The linear approach is taking a n-dimensional (number of spectral channels) feature α, and apply
as a dot product to each pixel ( n-dimension) in the multi-spectral image to generate a scalar output
per pixel. The αvector is "matched filter" [ 16,31], making the process of finding the best-fitting α
critical for signature exploitation in the ground terrain distribution at hand.
In ideal instances when there is no background (i.e. all white ground terrain) and just CH 4gas
present, the αis just the scaled version of the CH 4signature ( t). However in real-world scenarios
with spatially varying ground terrain this is not the case. For example, water has strong absorption of
solar radiations, therefore the methane on such backgrounds has very weak visibility [ 11]. On the
other hand, bare soil, rocks, etc have lower absorption, and the methane present in such background
has strong visibility. An understanding of ground terrain and underlying albedo properties (especially
in the methane sensitive spectral ranges) is critical to improve Signal to Noise ratios in our Sentinel-2
data. To account for spatial albedo differences in real-world scenes, we propose to deploy a land
cover classification as shown in Figure 1 and use that land cover information to build our SEMF
(See Appendix Sec 4.2). The final SEMF used in our architecture is:
ˆαk(ri) =(ri−µk)TCov−1
kϵtq
ϵtTCov−1
kϵt∀i∈k, (1)
SEMF (ri) =(ri−µ)TCov−1t√
ϵtTCov−1t(2)
where ˆαk(ri)is the estimated methane column enhancement, riis the captured radiance at ithpixel
in the multispectral image, µk&Cov−1are the mean and the inverse of covariance matrix for kth
class and ϵrepresent the chemical properties of CH 4.SEMF is represented by a green block in
Figure 2. An example of ˆαk(ri)estimations is shown in column-4 of Figure 1. Our approach is
simple and effective, it can be implemented with basic python pseudo-code as shown in appendix
algorithm 1. Details about SEMF can be found in the Appendix at the end of the paper.
3 Future work
While we have developed and tested the SEMF of CH 4estimations only on a few samples where
some good ground data exists, there is much work to be done to (a) implement it in the proposed
3transformer-based neural network architecture, (b) test the whole transformer model with glob-
ally simulation-based and release-based emissions data (c) evaluate performance of the model by
comparing it with the time-series-based approaches in recent literature.
References
[1]Philippe Ciais, Christopher Sabine, Govindasamy Bala, Laurent Bopp, Victor Brovkin, Josep
Canadell, Abha Chhabra, Ruth DeFries, James Galloway, Martin Heimann, et al. Carbon and
other biogeochemical cycles. In Climate change 2013: the physical science basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change , pages 465–570. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[2] Mary Crowell. President biden announces new methane emissions reduction strategy, 2022.
[3]Daniel H Cusworth, Daniel J Jacob, Daniel J Varon, Christopher Chan Miller, Xiong Liu,
Kelly Chance, Andrew K Thorpe, Riley M Duren, Charles E Miller, David R Thompson, et al.
Potential of next-generation imaging spectrometers to detect and quantify methane point sources
from space. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , 12(10):5655–5668, 2019.
[4]Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai,
Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al.
An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020.
[5]Thibaud Ehret, Aurélien De Truchis, Matthieu Mazzolini, Jean-Michel Morel, A. d’Aspremont,
Thomas Lauvaux, Riley M. Duren, Daniel H. Cusworth, and Gabriele Facciolo. Global
tracking and quantification of oil and gas methane emissions from recurrent sentinel-2 imagery.
Environmental science & technology , 2022.
[6]Christian Frankenberg, Andrew K Thorpe, David R Thompson, Glynn Hulley, Eric Adam
Kort, Nick Vance, Jakob Borchardt, Thomas Krings, Konstantin Gerilowski, Colm Sweeney,
et al. Airborne methane remote measurements reveal heavy-tail flux distribution in four corners
region. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 113(35):9734–9739, 2016.
[7]Christopher C Funk, James Theiler, Dar A Roberts, and Christoph C Borel. Clustering to
improve matched filter detection of weak gas plumes in hyperspectral thermal imagery. IEEE
transactions on geoscience and remote sensing , 39(7):1410–1420, 2001.
[8]Takashi Hamazaki, Yutaka Kaneko, Akihiko Kuze, and Kayoko Kondo. Fourier transform
spectrometer for greenhouse gases observing satellite (gosat). In Enabling sensor and platform
technologies for spaceborne remote sensing , volume 5659, pages 73–80. SPIE, 2005.
[9]Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[10] ASM Iftekhar, Satish Kumar, R Austin McEver, Suya You, and BS Manjunath. Gtnet: Guided
transformer network for detecting human-object interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00596 ,
2021.
[11] Itziar Irakulis-Loitxate, Luis Guanter, Yin-Nian Liu, Daniel J Varon, Joannes D Maasakkers,
Yuzhong Zhang, Apisada Chulakadabba, Steven C Wofsy, Andrew K Thorpe, Riley M Duren,
et al. Satellite-based survey of extreme methane emissions in the permian basin. Science
Advances , 7(27):eabf4507, 2021.
[12] Daniel J Jacob, Alexander J Turner, Joannes D Maasakkers, Jianxiong Sheng, Kang Sun, Xiong
Liu, Kelly Chance, Ilse Aben, Jason McKeever, and Christian Frankenberg. Satellite observa-
tions of atmospheric methane and their value for quantifying methane emissions. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics , 16(22):14371–14396, 2016.
[13] California Institute of Technology Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Airborne visible infrared imaging
spectrometer - next generation (aviris-ng) overview, 2009.
4[14] Stefanie Kirschke, Philippe Bousquet, Philippe Ciais, Marielle Saunois, Josep G Canadell,
Edward J Dlugokencky, Peter Bergamaschi, Daniel Bergmann, Donald R Blake, Lori Bruhwiler,
et al. Three decades of global methane sources and sinks. Nature geoscience , 6(10):813–823,
2013.
[15] Roman V Kochanov, IE Gordon, LS Rothman, P Wcisło, C Hill, and JS Wilzewski. Hitran appli-
cation programming interface (hapi): A comprehensive approach to working with spectroscopic
data. Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer , 177:15–30, 2016.
[16] Satish Kumar, Carlos Torres, Oytun Ulutan, Alana Ayasse, Dar Roberts, and BS Manjunath.
Deep remote sensing methods for methane detection in overhead hyperspectral imagery. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages
1776–1785, 2020.
[17] JOS Lelieveld, Paul J Crutzen, and Frank J Dentener. Changing concentration, lifetime and
climate forcing of atmospheric methane. Tellus B , 50(2):128–150, 1998.
[18] Gunnar Myhre, Drew Shindell, and Julia Pongratz. Anthropogenic and natural radiative forcing.
2014.
[19] EG Nisbet, EJ Dlugokencky, MR Manning, D Lowry, RE Fisher, JL France, SE Michel,
JB Miller, JWC White, B Vaughn, et al. Rising atmospheric methane: 2007–2014 growth and
isotopic shift. Global Biogeochemical Cycles , 30(9):1356–1370, 2016.
[20] Euan G Nisbet, Edward J Dlugokencky, and Philippe Bousquet. Methane on the rise—again.
Science , 343(6170):493–495, 2014.
[21] US Department of State. U.s.-eu joint press release on the global methane pledge energy
pathway, 2022.
[22] Sudhanshu Pandey, Ritesh Gautam, Sander Houweling, Hugo Denier Van Der Gon, Pankaj
Sadavarte, Tobias Borsdorff, Otto Hasekamp, Jochen Landgraf, Paul Tol, Tim Van Kempen,
et al. Satellite observations reveal extreme methane leakage from a natural gas well blowout.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116(52):26376–26381, 2019.
[23] Darius Phiri, Matamyo Simwanda, Serajis Salekin, Vincent R Nyirenda, Yuji Murayama, and
Manjula Ranagalage. Sentinel-2 data for land cover/use mapping: a review. Remote Sensing ,
12(14):2291, 2020.
[24] Anja Ražnjevi ´c, Chiel van Heerwaarden, Bart van Stratum, Arjan Hensen, Ilona Velzeboer, Pim
van den Bulk, and Maarten Krol. Interpretation of field observations of point-source methane
plume using observation-driven large-eddy simulations. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics ,
22(10):6489–6505, 2022.
[25] Matthew Rigby, Stephen A Montzka, Ronald G Prinn, James WC White, Dickon Young, Simon
O’doherty, Mark F Lunt, Anita L Ganesan, Alistair J Manning, Peter G Simmonds, et al. Role
of atmospheric oxidation in recent methane growth. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences , 114(21):5373–5377, 2017.
[26] Hinrich Schaefer, Sara E Mikaloff Fletcher, Cordelia Veidt, Keith R Lassey, Gordon W Brails-
ford, Tony M Bromley, Edward J Dlugokencky, Sylvia E Michel, John B Miller, Ingeborg Levin,
et al. A 21st-century shift from fossil-fuel to biogenic methane emissions indicated by 13ch4.
Science , 352(6281):80–84, 2016.
[27] Stefan Schwietzke, Owen A Sherwood, Lori MP Bruhwiler, John B Miller, Giuseppe Etiope,
Edward J Dlugokencky, Sylvia Englund Michel, Victoria A Arling, Bruce H Vaughn, James WC
White, et al. Upward revision of global fossil fuel methane emissions based on isotope database.
Nature , 538(7623):88–91, 2016.
[28] Evan David Sherwin, Jeffrey S Rutherford, Yuanlei Chen, Sam Aminfard, Eric A Kort, Robert B
Jackson, and Adam R Brandt. Single-blind validation of space-based point-source methane
emissions detection and quantification. 2022.
5[29] Hind Taud and JF Mas. Multilayer perceptron (mlp). In Geomatic approaches for modeling
land change scenarios , pages 451–455. Springer, 2018.
[30] James Theiler, Bernard R Foy, and Andrew M Fraser. Beyond the adaptive matched filter:
nonlinear detectors for weak signals in high-dimensional clutter. In Algorithms and Technologies
for Multispectral, Hyperspectral, and Ultraspectral Imagery XIII , volume 6565, pages 26–37.
SPIE, 2007.
[31] DR Thompson, I Leifer, H Bovensmann, M Eastwood, M Fladeland, C Frankenberg, K Ger-
ilowski, RO Green, S Kratwurst, T Krings, et al. Real-time remote detection and measurement
for airborne imaging spectroscopy: a case study with methane. Atmospheric Measurement
Techniques , 8(10):4383–4397, 2015.
[32] DR Thompson, AK Thorpe, C Frankenberg, RO Green, R Duren, A Hollstein, L Guanter,
E Middleton, L Ong, and S Ungar. Orbital measurement of the aliso canyon ch4 super-emitter.
Geophys Res Lett , 43:6571–6578, 2016.
[33] Alexander J Turner, Christian Frankenberg, Paul O Wennberg, and Daniel J Jacob. Ambiguity
in the causes for decadal trends in atmospheric methane and hydroxyl. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences , 114(21):5367–5372, 2017.
[34] Daniel J Varon, Dylan Jervis, Jason McKeever, Ian Spence, David Gains, and Daniel J Jacob.
High-frequency monitoring of anomalous methane point sources with multispectral sentinel-2
satellite observations. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , 14(4):2771–2785, 2021.
[35] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 30, 2017.
[36] Zhan Zhang, Evan D Sherwin, Daniel J Varon, and Adam R Brandt. Detecting and quantifying
methane emissions from oil and gas production: algorithm development with ground-truth
calibration based on sentinel-2 satellite imagery. EGUsphere , pages 1–23, 2022.
4 Appendix
4.1 Background & Motivation:
Although important for regulation enforcement,successfully detecting and delineating CH 4plumes
on a regular basis poses a great challenge to researchers and stakeholders given its amorphous
characteristics. To tackle the overall lack of reliable and actionable methane emissions information
on the vast scales global natural and anthropogenic methane-emitters (e.g. oil & gas sites, landfills,
wetlands), there are increasing efforts by the research and industry community to detect and quantify
methane plumes with airborne [ 13] and satellite-based instruments [ 34,12,3,22] . Given the strong
potential of satellite-based instruments to deliver high-frequency data on global scales and even
remote and hard-to-access regions, recent research has depicted the potentials of deploying methane
emissions analysis on public, global-mapping, multi-spectral instruments like the ESA Sentinel-2
mission [ 34,3,8,22,3]. With two polar-orbiting, sun-synchronous satellites, the Multispectral
Instrument (MSI) onboard the Sentinel-2 satellites measures the reflected radiance from Earth in
multiple bands covering various areas of the electromagnetic spectrum [ 23]. Among these bands,
band 11 ( ∼1500nm−1660nm) and band 12 ( ∼2090nm−2290nm) are able to capture methane’s
SWIR absorption features at a spatial resolution of 20m2, leading to a large breadth of work and
studies on using Sentinel-2 data to detect and quantify methane emissions [34, 36, 12, 5].
4.2 Enhanced Matched Filter:
The passive multispectral image is H×W×n∈Rwhere HandWare height and width of the
image respectively and n(n∼10) spectral channels. In this data, we are looking for a very weak
signature (CH 4) of interest hidden in background (variable ground terrain). The most common linear
approach for finding CH 4is taking a n-dimensional (number of spectral channels) feature α, and
apply as a dot product to each pixel ( n-dimension) in the hyperspectral image to generate a scalar
6output per pixel. This operation is supposed to remove the ground terrain and amplifies CH 4signature.
Theαvector is "matched filter" [ 16,31]. Therefore computing right αis very critical for finding
the signature of interest. It is dependent on desired signature and on the distribution of the ground
terrain. To model α, letri∈Rnbe aithradiance vector from the hyperspectral image representing
the ground terrain pixel and sensor noise, and tbe the CH 4signature. This is modeled as the additive
perturbation. The spectrum is represented by ξ(xB), when the gas is present. The linear matched
filter is modeled as additive perturbation:
ξ(ri) =ri+ϵt, (3)
Here ξ(ri)is the spectrum when CH 4is present and ϵrepresents the chemical properties of the gas.
The CH 4signature trepresents the change in radiance units of the background caused by adding
a unit mixing ratio length of CH 4absorption [ 7,16]. In the ideal scenario where only CH 4gas is
present in signal (i.e. all white background), the matched filter output is αTϵt. In case there is no gas
and just ground terrain and sensor noise, the matched filter output is αTri. The variance ( V ar) of
αTrifor the latter is represented as :
V ar(αTri) =⟨(αTri−αTµ)2⟩=αTCovα, (4)
Here Cov andµare covariance and mean respectively. Inspired from [ 16,7] we define the Methane-
to-Ground terrain Ratio (MGR) as
MGR =|αTϵt|2
αTCovα, (5)
We can see that the magnitude of αdoes not affect MGR. According to [ 30,7,16], the MGR can be
maximized subject to constraints(zero mean and αTKαconstraint to 1). The matched filter αis then
represented by:
α=Cov−1ϵt√
ϵtTCov−1ϵt, (6)
where tis the CH 4signature compute from HITRAN database [ 15],ϵrepresents the chemical
properties of the gas, and Cov is covariance of the ground terrain. In ideal instances when there is
no background (i.e. all white background) and just CH 4gas present. The matched filter is directly
proportional to t. In simple terms, it is just the target signature ( t) itself scaled so that the filtered
output has variance of one. The methane enhancement per column can be computed as follows:
ˆα(ri) =(ri−µ)TCov−1ϵt√
ϵtTCov−1ϵt, (7)
where tis the CH 4signature compute from HITRAN database [ 15],ϵrepresents the chemical
properties of the gas, and Cov is covariance of the ground terrain. ˆα(ri)is the column enhancement
of methane per pixel. The covariance matrix ( Cov) used is not known as prior and is estimated from
data. It is computed as outer product of the mean subtracted radiance over all the pixels. In other
words, The standard matched filter from equation 7 computes the covariance ( Cov) of ground terrain
with an underlying assumption that in all elements have similar absorption pattern. The standard
matched filter from equation 7 computes the covariance ( Cov) of ground terrain with an underlying
assumption that in all elements have similar absorption pattern. But in realistic scenarios, the type
of terrain changes frequently, there is water bodies, bare soil, vegetation, dense vegetation, building
structures in cities, roads etc in a single image. For example, water have a strong absorption of solar
radiations, therefore the methane on such backgrounds have a very weak visibility. On the other hand,
bare soil, rocks, etc have lower absorption, the methane present on such background have strong
visibility. A simple and single approximation of the covariance ( Cov) of ground distribution can not
provide the right and effective estimate of methane enhancement. To tackle this limitation, we do
land cover segmentation and classification. Cov per class: In practice we have 20 classes, each with
a segmentation mask. We merge two or more adjacent classes into one if the number of pixels in that
class is less 20000 . The Number of pixels in each class is kept higher to ensure that while computing
the covariance ( Cov) matrix, the methane signal does not have any or have negligible effect. It is
okay to merge adjacent classes into one because they have almost similar radiance/reflectance, for
example, light vegetation and normal vegetation have similar reflectance, etc. The covariance Covk
ofkthclass is computed as:
Covk=1
Ni=jX
i=1(ri−µk)(ri−µk)T∀j∈k, (8)
7where Nis the number of pixels ( >10000 ) inkthclass and µkis the mean of kthclass. For each
class we compute the mean µk, covariance matrix Covkand matched filter αk. While iterating
through each pixel of hyperspectral image, we check to which class kthe pixel ribelongs to and use
those pre-computed values. The final Sentinel Enhanced Matched Filter is shown in algorithm 1
ˆαk(ri) =(ri−µk)TCov−1
kϵtq
ϵtTCov−1
kϵt∀i∈k, (9)
Data: Sentinel-2 12 channel dataset
Result: CH4concentration map
initialization;
fordatum inDATASET do
1. create memory map datum ;
2. seg_mask = compute segmentation mask;
formask in seg_mask do
data.append (datum [mask])
if(len(data) <100000 ):continue
Cov,µ= compute_stats(data);
end
3.forriin data do
k = seg_mask[i];
ˆαk(ri) =(ri−µk)TCov−1
kϵtq
ϵtTCov−1
kϵt
end
ˆαk(ri)∀classes and i ∈datum
end
Algorithm 1: SEMFwhere Cov−1is the inverse of covariance matrix.
Our approach is simple and effective, it can be
implemented with basic python pseudo code as
shown in algorithm 1.
8