Image-based Early Detection System for Wildfires
Omkar Ranadive∗
Alchera X
omkar.ranadive@alcheralabs.comJisu Kim*
Alchera
js.kim@alcherainc.com
Serin Lee*
Alchera X
serin.lee@alcheralabs.comYoungseo Cha
Alchera
ys.cha@alcherainc.comHeechan Park
Alchera
hc.park@alcherainc.com
Minkook Cho
Alchera
mk.cho@alcherainc.comYoung K. Hwang†
Alchera
yk.hwang@alcherainc.com
Abstract
Wildfires are a disastrous phenomenon which cause damage to land, loss of property,
air pollution, and even loss of human life. Due to the warmer and drier conditions
created by climate change, more severe and uncontrollable wildfires are expected to
occur in the coming years. This could lead to a global wildfire crisis and have dire
consequences on our planet. Hence, it has become imperative to use technology to
help prevent the spread of wildfires. One way to prevent the spread of wildfires
before they become too large is to perform early detection i.e, detecting the smoke
before the actual fire starts. In this paper, we present our Wildfire Detection and
Alert System which use machine learning to detect wildfire smoke with a high
degree of accuracy and can send immediate alerts to users. Our technology is
currently being used in the USA to monitor data coming in from hundreds of
cameras daily. We show that our system has a high true detection rate and a low
false detection rate. Our performance evaluation study also shows that on an
average our system detects wildfire smoke faster than an actual person.
1 Introduction
Every year, wildfires burn down millions of acres of land, damage thousands of structures and they
also cause severe air pollution. Wildfires are disastrous to both human communities and wildlife.
They cause billions of dollars in damages every year. In 2021 alone, there were over 58 thousand
fires in the USA which burned down 7.13 million acres of land. Due to the global warming caused by
climate change [ 1,2], warmer and drier conditions are being created. Warmer temperatures cause
greater evaporation which leads to drier soils and vegetation which makes them more susceptible to
burning and can lead to severe wildfires. Studies have shown that in the coming decades, there is
going to be a global increase in large and severe wildfires due to the adverse effects of climate change
[3,4,5]. Wildfires are already extremely difficult to control and mitigate and if their severity keeps
worsening over the years like the studies have shown then it would have dire consequences on our
planet.
Over the years, technology has been used to analyze different aspects of wildfires like - Fire Spread
Simulators [ 6,7] and Detecting Wildfires from Satellite Data [ 8,9]. There are also many different
∗Equal Contribution
†Corresponding author
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2022Figure 1: Overview of our Wildfire Detection and Alert System
fire management tools available online. While these technological tools are helpful in analyzing and
mitigating the spread of wildfires, they don’t help much in early detection and prevention of wildfires.
Cameras providing real-time image feed have been used for quite some time by human operators to
monitor and identify wildfires. However, it is not possible for humans to monitor such data accurately
around the clock. Machine learning (ML) algorithms are much more efficient for such real-time
image based data. Such ML algorithms can perform early detection of wildfires i.e, detecting the
smoke before the actual fire starts [ 10]. While there are many early detection products in the market,
many of them require specialized hardware, have limited coverage, and have a high false detection
rate. We present our Wildfire Detection System in this paper which has a high true detection rate,
low false detection rate and which only uses real-time camera data to perform early detection of the
wildfire smoke (Fig 1). The human operator now only has to confirm the detection alert instead of
monitoring the cameras all the time. Once the alert is confirmed, authorities can reach the scene and
prevent the wildfire smoke from turning into a large, uncontrollable wildfire. Our system is currently
being actively used in the USA and monitors near real-time data from hundreds of cameras daily.
2 Methodology
2.1 Data
There are no good publicly available labeled datasets which can be used for early detection of
wildfires. So we gathered raw image data from Alert Wildfire Cameras [ 11]. Alert Wildfire is an
association which provides open access to fire spotting cameras placed in different parts of the USA.
These cameras are widely used by firefighters and first responders. We gathered data from 400
different cameras. These cameras cover many different terrains and the data was collected every
month from Jun’21 - Mar’22. Therefore, the dataset is rich and diverse. The final dataset consists
of 90,000 images. We then labeled the images with bounding boxes and categorized the images as
wildire and non-wildfire images. More details on the dataset can be found in Appendix A.1.
2.2 Model Architecture
The main challenge with smoke detection is that smoke can be of varying scales. Therefore, our
model architecture is specifically designed to extract relevant information at different scales. To do
this, we use an architecture similar to the one used in FCOS [ 12]. An overview of our architecture
can be seen in Fig 2. As our detection system gets near real-time data from multiple cameras, we
needed a backbone network which is relatively lightweight and fast. That’s why we chose ResNet-18
[13] as our backbone network.
After the input image is passed through our backbone ResNet-18, the Feature Pyramid Network
(FPN) [ 14] is then used to extract information from the different layers of ResNet-18. Inside the FPN,
we apply deformable convolution operation (dconv) [ 15] to the information extracted from each layer.
Deformable convolutions have offsets which are learned based on the target task. Hence, as opposed
to the fixed receptive field of a normal convolution operation, deformable convolutions allow us to
have an adaptive receptive field which is more useful to detect smoke at various scales.
After the deformable convolution operation, the information at every level of the pyramid is added
together. Then a set of 1x1 convolution operations are applied in the prediction head to get a
classification (wildfire vs non-wildfire) and the bounding box coordinates. The bounding box
coordinates are obtained using regression as a 4D vector t∗, similar to how they are obtained in FCOS
[12].
2Input Image
dconv
Prediction HeaddconvdconvResNet-18 backboneFeature Pyramid NetworkFigure 2: Model Architecture of our Wildfire Detection System
(a)(b)(c)
Figure 3: Adaptive Training Sample Selection Process. (a) All points inside the bounding box are
considered as candidate samples. (b) Positive samples selected using original ATSS (c) Positive
samples selected using our modified ATSS
For training, we use a loss function similar to that of FCOS [12]. It is defined as follows:
loss =1
Npos(X
x,yLcls(px,y, cx,y) +X
x,y1{cx,y=1}Lreg(tx,y, t∗
x,y) +X
x,y1{cx,y=1}Lcen(t∗
x,y)).(1)
where Nposis the number of positive samples, Lclsis focal loss [ 16],px,yis the predicted score and
cx,yis the grouth truth label, Lregis IOU loss [ 17] where tx,yis the vector of ground truth bounding
box coordinates and t∗
x,yis the vector of the predicted coordinates, and Lcenis centerness loss [ 12].
LregandLcenare only calculated for positive samples. A sample is considered positive if cx,y= 1
and if it gets selected using our training sample selection process.
2.3 Modified Adaptive Training Sample Selection
In a recent paper [ 18], it was shown that the performance of object detectors is dependent on how the
positive and negative samples are selected. The paper [ 18] also proposes an adaptive training sample
selection (ATSS) process which selects these samples based on statistical characteristics of the object.
In our sample selection process, we use a modified version of ATSS.
The process begins by considering all points inside the ground truth bounding box as candidate
samples (Fig 3a). Then IOU is calculated between the bounding boxes predicted by the candidate
samples and the ground truth bounding box. Then a final sample score is calculated for every
candidate point as follows:
Score x,y= (IOU )x,y∗px,y (2)
Where (IOU )x,yis the IOU value for the sample point and px,yis the confidence value, i.e, output
from prediction head of the model for that point. Finally, threshold is calculated as the mean +
standard deviation of all scores. Then samples greater than the threshold value are selected as positive
samples. The remaining samples inside the ground truth bounding box are not considered as negative
samples but instead ignored during the loss calculation. Fig 3b and Fig 3c show the positive samples
selected by original ATSS and our modified ATSS. Our version is able to select a greater number of
relevant samples for training.
3Figure 4: Examples of wildfire smoke detected by our model
Table 1: Performance on validation set
TP TN FP FN Acc Pre TPR FPR
No. of images 10690 27005 2205 1234 0.916 0.829 0.896 0.075
Table 2: Evaluation Study from Jun’22 - Jul’22
Time taken to detect wildfire smoke % of smoke events detected (cumulative)
Within 60 seconds from the start of smoke 60.5%
Within 3 minutes from the start of smoke 76.8%
Within 5 minutes from the start of smoke 86.9%
Over 5 minutes from the start of smoke 100%
3 Results
As seen in Fig 4, our model is capable of detecting multiple wildfire smoke events in the same image
and also visually hard to detect smoke events. Table 1 shows the performance of our model on the
validation set. It can be seen that the model has a high number of True Positives (TP) and True
Negatives (TN) and a low number of False Positives (FP) and False Negatives (FN). The model has
an accuracy (acc) of 91.6%, precision of 82.9%, a true positive rate (TPR) / recall of 89.6% and a
false positive rate (FPR) of 7.5%. More instances of detection results can be found in Appendix A.2.
We also did an evaluation study of our model in the real-world over two months from Jun’22 - Jul’22.
A total of 869 wildfire smoke events occurred during this period. In Table 2, we show the time taken
by our model to detect these smoke events. Our model was able to detect 60.5% of the total events
within just 60 seconds from the start of smoke. A total of 86.9% of the events were detected within 5
minutes from the start of the smoke and all 869 events (100%) were detected after 5+ minutes. We
also compared the average detection time of the model with the average detection time from a human
operator. The model on an average, detected the events 2 minutes, 57 seconds faster. These results
show that our model is capable of fast and accurate detection. Details on challenges and future work
can be found in Appendix A.3.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented our Wildfire Detection and Alert System which can perform highly
accurate early detection of wildfire smoke and send immediate alerts to users. Our system is already
being used in the USA in a real-world setting to detect and prevent wildfires. We believe that such
ML based real-time detection systems are highly important in the fight against climate change as
such systems are capable of monitoring data around the clock, detecting events faster than humans,
and thus help in arming the first responders with crucial real-time information which allows them
to respond faster and help keep people and property safe. Our system is also being used by utility
companies to protect transmission lines and other valuable infrastructure assets from wildfire smoke.
This ensures that various essential utilities like electricity are provided to people everyday without any
interruptions. Therefore, we hope that in the coming years, systems like ours will be used throughout
the world to fight against the upcoming threat of more severe wildfires.
4References
[1]Rebecca Lindsey and LuAnn Dahlman. Climate change: Global temperature. Available online:
climate.gov , 2020.
[2]Sjoukje Y Philip, Sarah F Kew, Geert Jan van Oldenborgh, Faron S Anslow, Sonia I Seneviratne,
Robert Vautard, Dim Coumou, Kristie L Ebi, Julie Arrighi, Roop Singh, et al. Rapid attribution
analysis of the extraordinary heatwave on the pacific coast of the us and canada june 2021.
Earth System Dynamics Discussions , pages 1–34, 2021.
[3]Donald J Wuebbles, David W Fahey, and Kathy A Hibbard. Climate science special report:
fourth national climate assessment, volume i. 2017.
[4]Andrew Sullivan, Elaine Baker, and Tiina Kurvits. Spreading like wildfire: The rising threat of
extraordinary landscape fires. 2022.
[5]Anthony LeRoy Westerling. Increasing western us forest wildfire activity: sensitivity to changes
in the timing of spring. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences ,
371(1696):20150178, 2016.
[6]Mark A Finney. FARSITE, Fire Area Simulator–model development and evaluation . Number 4.
US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, 1998.
[7]Joaquín Ramírez, Santiago Monedero, and David Buckley. New approaches in fire simulations
analysis with wildfire analyst. In The 5th International Wildland Fire Conference. Sun City,
South Africa , pages 1–17, 2011.
[8]Nguyen Thanh Toan, Phan Thanh Cong, Nguyen Quoc Viet Hung, and Jun Jo. A deep
learning approach for early wildfire detection from hyperspectral satellite images. In 2019 7th
International Conference on Robot Intelligence Technology and Applications (RiTA) , pages
38–45. IEEE, 2019.
[9] Kostis Kyzirakos, Manos Karpathiotakis, George Garbis, Charalampos Nikolaou, Konstantina
Bereta, Ioannis Papoutsis, Themos Herekakis, Dimitrios Michail, Manolis Koubarakis, and
Charalambos Kontoes. Wildfire monitoring using satellite images, ontologies and linked
geospatial data. Journal of web semantics , 24:18–26, 2014.
[10] Süleyman Aslan, U ˘gur Güdükbay, B U ˘gur Töreyin, and A Enis Çetin. Early wildfire smoke
detection based on motion-based geometric image transformation and deep convolutional
generative adversarial networks. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 8315–8319. IEEE, 2019.
[11] The University of Nevada Reno, University of California San Diego, and the University of
Oregon. Alert wildfire, 2013. https://www.alertwildfire.org/.
[12] Zhi Tian, Chunhua Shen, Hao Chen, and Tong He. Fcos: Fully convolutional one-stage object
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages
9627–9636, 2019.
[13] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[14] Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie.
Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2117–2125, 2017.
[15] Jifeng Dai, Haozhi Qi, Yuwen Xiong, Yi Li, Guodong Zhang, Han Hu, and Yichen Wei.
Deformable convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision , pages 764–773, 2017.
[16] Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense
object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,
pages 2980–2988, 2017.
5[17] Jiahui Yu, Yuning Jiang, Zhangyang Wang, Zhimin Cao, and Thomas Huang. Unitbox: An
advanced object detection network. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM international conference
on Multimedia , pages 516–520, 2016.
[18] Shifeng Zhang, Cheng Chi, Yongqiang Yao, Zhen Lei, and Stan Z Li. Bridging the gap between
anchor-based and anchor-free detection via adaptive training sample selection. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9759–9768,
2020.
A Appendix
Figure 5: Examples of diverse set of images present in our dataset
Table 3: Distribution of the data
Wildfire Non-Wildfire Total
Train 26690 19726 46416
Validation 11924 29210 41134
A.1 The Dataset
We collected a total of 90,000 images from Alert Wildfire cameras [ 11] and labeled them. The images
were categorized as wildfire and non-wildfire and then divided into train and validation sets as shown
in Table 3. The dataset includes images from a diverse range of terrains as shown in Fig 5.
Figure 6: Examples of true positives
6Figure 7: Examples of false positives
A.2 Detection Results
The problem of smoke detection is especially hard in this setting as it can be seen from Fig 5 and Fig
7 how easy it is to confuse smoke with clouds or fog. However, our model does a pretty good job
in general and has low false positives as seen in Table 1. Fig 4 and Fig 6 show a few examples of
true positives detected by our model. Fig 7 shows a few examples of false positives detected by our
model.
A.3 Challenges and Future Work
Detecting wildfire smoke in such diverse scenarios is a challenging task. As seen from Fig 7, it
is possible to mistake clouds, fog, and smoke from industrial processes (e.g. smoke coming from
chimneys) as wildfire smoke.
Currently, the way we tackle false positives is by having a human in the loop. A smoke detection
alert is sent to a human operator and only when the human confirms the alert, it gets sent to other
users like first responders (Fig 1).
Just like false positives, there could also be false negatives, i.e, the system fails to detect the wildfire
smoke. However, we found that the system eventually manages to detect the smoke, i.e, the system
performs late detection once the smoke gets bigger. So even if the system fails to detect the smoke
at time step t, it manages to detect it in most cases at later time steps. This was validated from our
evaluation study (Table 2) where our system was successfully able to detect all wildfire events in 5+
minutes from the start of the smoke.
However, we acknowledge that we need to develop better ways to deal with false positives and
false negatives and make our model more robust. Therefore, in the future, we plan to gather more
data which deals with these scenarios better and train our model further to reduce the rate of false
positives/negatives. We also plan to experiment with different ML techniques which could help
improve our model performance and incorporate them in future versions of our system.
7