InvestESG: A Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
Benchmark for Studying Climate Investment as a
Social Dilemma
Xiaoxuan Hou∗1, Jiayi Yuan∗2, Natasha Jaques2,3
1Foster School of Business, University of Washington
2Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
3Google Deepmind
xxhou@uw.edu, jiayiy9@cs.washington.edu, jzl@google.com
nj@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
InvestESG is a novel multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) benchmark
designed to study the impact of Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG)
disclosure mandates on corporate climate investments. Supported by both Py-
Torch and JAX implementation, the benchmark models an intertemporal social
dilemma where companies balance short-term profit losses from climate mitigation
efforts and long-term benefits from reducing climate risk, while ESG-conscious
investors attempt to influence corporate behavior through their investment deci-
sions, in a scalable and hardware-accelerated manner. Companies allocate capital
across mitigation, greenwashing, and resilience, with varying strategies influencing
climate outcomes and investor preferences. Our experiments show that without
ESG-conscious investors with sufficient capital, corporate mitigation efforts remain
limited under the disclosure mandate. However, when a critical mass of investors
prioritizes ESG, corporate cooperation increases, which in turn reduces climate
risks and enhances long-term financial stability. Additionally, providing more
information about global climate risks encourages companies to invest more in
mitigation, even without investor involvement. Our findings align with empirical
research using real-world data, highlighting MARL’s potential to inform policy
by providing insights into large-scale socio-economic challenges through efficient
testing of alternative policy and market designs.
1 Introduction
Climate change poses a persistent threat to the natural ecosystem and the global economy. Addressing
climate change requires coordinated efforts, particularly from large corporations, which are reportedly
responsible for over 70% of global industrial greenhouse gas emissions [ 32]. However, emissions
mitigation presents a social dilemma [ 40], where the benefits of reduced emissions are shared
globally, but the cost of reducing emissions reduces profits for individual companies [48, 15, 8]. As
corporations are inherently self-interested, they are unlikely to reduce emissions voluntarily without
external incentives or regulations.
Numerous policies have been proposed to address this challenge, among which mandatory Envi-
ronmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) disclosure has recently ignited a vigorous global debate.
The Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) proposal, which would require publicly traded
companies to disclose climate-related risks and greenhouse gas emissions, attracted over 15,000
comments, making it one of the most contentious proposals in the SEC’s history [ 56,13]. This
intense debate has led to an indefinite delay in the proposal’s implementation [ 55]. Similar delays
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2022.Figure 1: TheInvestESG Environment. Corporations choose how much to invest in mitigating emissions,
which affects their ESG Score. Climate-conscious investors can see ESG Scores when deciding how much
to invest in each company. However, companies can engage in greenwashing to inexpensively and falsely
improve ESG scores without actually mitigating climate change. InvestESG is a social dilemma, where selfish,
profit-motivated corporations will not invest in mitigation without further incentives, leading to increased climate
risks and decreased global wealth.
are also unfolding in the European Union and Korea [ 6,38]. This highlights the need for thorough
research to effectively inform the design and implementation of these policies.
Traditional economics and policy research relies on either empirical analysis—which does not enable
testing possible new policies [ 21,42,39]—or theoretical economics models, which are often limited
to scenarios with only two agents (e.g., Friedman et al. 29), or single-period games (e.g., Pástor
et al. 50). In contrast, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) enables simulating complex
interactions between multiple agents over extended time periods, under diverse hypothesized policy
settings. Leveraging MARL to address large-scale socio-economic questions is a growing field [ 33].
Prior work has demonstrated the potential of MARL to design effective taxation schemes that enhance
both equality and productivity [66], highlighting its relevance for tackling social challenges.
We propose using multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to explore the impact of the ESG
disclosure policy. We introduce InvestESG , an open-source MARL benchmark, to examine how
profit-driven corporations balance short-term profits with long-term climate investments and whether
ESG-informed investor choices influence corporate behavior. The simulation involves two agent types:
companies and investors. Companies allocate funds to mitigation, greenwashing, and resilience,
while investors choose investment portfolios based on their preferences for financial returns and ESG
benefits. Our experiments with a state-of-the-art MARL implementation yield findings that align
with real-world empirical evidence and provide novel insights.
More broadly, we demonstrate the potential of using a MARL framework to inform policy debates
in the field of climate change. Our aim is not to claim that our model fully represents real-world
complexity. It remains a "first-principles" model; however, it captures aspects that are challenging to
integrate into a single framework using traditional economic approaches. To further improvement our
environment setup to accommodate different use cases, we plan to seek advice from climate change
research experts within the CCAI community. We present InvestESG as a challenging benchmark for
the machine learning community; for researchers that are interested in developing MARL algorithms
that can solve social dilemmas, InvestESG represents a social dilemma environment that could inform
policymaking. We will provide the code for the benchmark and agent baselines in open-source.
2 The InvestESG Environment and Experiments
In this study, we introduce InvestESG, a MARL benchmark environment to analyze the impact of
ESG disclosure mandates on corporate investment in climate efforts. The simulation involves two
types of agents: companies and investors. At each time step, companies decide how much investment
to allocate toward mitigation, which incurs higher short-term costs, thus reducing profits, and affects
their attractiveness to investors. However, these investments reduce emissions and lower the overall
climate risk for society, leading to improved long-term financial performance for all entities. Investors
derive utility from two main metrics: (1) the profits generated by the companies they invest in, and
(2) the increased utility from investing in ESG-friendly firms depending on their preference for ESG
investments. Investors allocate their capital based on their knowledge of each company’s total capital,
2(a) 0/3 Conscious
Investors
(b) 2/3 Conscious
Investors
(c) 3/3 Conscious
Investors
(d) 3/3 Conscious &
Resilience Spending
(e) 3/3 Conscious &
Greenwashing
Figure 2: Schelling diagrams demonstrating that the environment constitutes a social dilemma. The graphs
compare payoffs between cooperation (mitigation, blue lines) and defection (no mitigation, red lines) for a focal
company, given varying number of other cooperating companies. Yellow lines represent the average payoff
across all companies when the focal company defects. Subfigure (a) illustrates the selfish scenario, where all
three investors consistently prioritize financial returns ( αIj= 0,forj= 1,2,3). Here, defection always yields
higher payoffs for the focal company than cooperation, leading all companies to defect. However, widespread
defection results in lower overall profits, as the average payoff (yellow) increases with greater cooperation.
Subfigure (b) and (c) correspond to two and three infinitely ESG-conscious investors ( αIj≈ ∞ ), respectively.
In (b), cooperation yields higher payoffs than defection for the focal company when few others cooperate. In
(c), cooperation outperforms defection in all cases. Therefore, (b-c) demonstrate how investor behavior can
transform the environment, eliminating the social dilemma by aligning corporate incentives with mitigation.
Subfigures (d) and (e) build on (c) with three ESG-conscious investors. Subfigure (d) introduces resilience
spending, while (e) adds greenwashing. The latter reintroduces a social dilemma, where corporations again
avoid mitigation.
past returns, climate risk exposure, and ESG score1from the previous step. The environment is
implemented in both PyTorch and JAX.
Climate change as a social dilemma. Companies’ trade-off between short-term private costs and
long-term collective benefits create a social dilemma within the environment. To illustrate this,
we use empirical Schelling diagrams [ 34], which plot the focal-company payoffs from following
either a cooperative or defecting policy, depending on the number of other cooperating company
agents in a 5-company, 3-investor environment. In our case, cooperation represents a policy which
consistently invests 0.5% of capital in mitigation and 0 in greenwashing or resilience building, while
a defector policy takes zero action in all of mitigation, greenwashing, and resilience. Figure 2a to 2c
reveal that the environment constitutes a social dilemma when investors are profit-motivated, which
can be mitigated as more investors become ESG-conscious. However, if companies can defect by
greenwashing, where companies can portray themselves as climate friendly at a low cost without
genuine mitigation, the environment reverts back to a social dilemma.
Experiments with state-of-the-art MARL baselines suggest highly ESG-conscious investors
are required to effectively incentivize mitigation efforts. We train the state-of-the-art MARL
algorithm, IPPO [ 19], to learn to optimize the company and investor behavior. By default, 5 companies
are modeled alongside 3 investors, with a total beginning market wealth of $98 trillion, which is
comparable to the global stock market cap [ 61]. All the results are averaged result based on 3 runs of
different random seeds, with the standard error plotted in the shaded region. Our results are consistent
when scaled up to 25 companies and 25 investors as shown in the Appendix.
To evaluate the effectiveness of ESG disclosure mandates in incentivizing emissions mitigation by
companies, we conduct three experiments: (1) Status Quo : All agents are profit-motivated, and no
ESG scores are released; (2) Status Quo with Mandate : ESG scores are disclosed, but investors remain
profit-driven ( α= 0); (3) Mandate with ESG-Conscious Investors : ESG scores are disclosed, and
investors are ESG-conscious ( α >0). In all scenarios, companies only choose mitigation effort levels,
with greenwashing and resilience spending disabled. Figure 3 tracks evaluation metrics over training.
The final system climate risks for the Status Quo with Mandate and low-ESG-conscious scenarios
(α= 0.5and1) are similar to those in the Status Quo , indicating that mandatory ESG disclosure
alone does not significantly incentivize mitigation when investors prioritize profits. However, when
investors have a high level of ESG-consciousness ( α= 10 ), companies invest significantly in
mitigation, reducing climate risk and increasing market wealth. In this setting, a few leading
companies attract the majority of ESG-conscious investments, forming a positive feedback loop
1The ESG score represents the fraction of capital that companies appear to allocate toward mitigation
efforts, including both genuine mitigation and greenwashing investments. The concept of greenwashing will be
introduced later in the discussion.
3Figure 3: Climate risk, total market wealth, total mitigation amount and climate event occurrence over the course
of training for the 5-company-3-investor case. We compare the status quo scenario with solely profit-driven
investors (investors with ESG consciousness level of 0), both with and without the ESG disclosure mandate,
to scenarios involving three ESG-conscious investors with ESG consciousness level of α= 0.5,α= 1, and
α= 10 . These results indicate that merely disclosing ESG scores is insufficient to resolve the social dilemma if
investors are not interested in investing in climate-friendly companies. Only when investors have a high level of
ESG consciousness— α= 10 , in this case—does the ESG mandate make a difference in increasing the level of
mitigation.
where better market performance draws further investments. These findings align with research
showing that ESG disclosure mandates encourage climate-friendly efforts driven by societal and
stakeholder pressures [ 14,30,25,28,11,35], and that fund managers are willing to sacrifice financial
returns for ESG benefits [39].
In addition to the main results presented above, our results further show that (1) heterogeneous
investor preferences lead to divergence in agent strategies for both company and investor agents; (2)
the possibility of greenwashing does not significantly undermine mitigation efforts; and (3) providing
additional information about climate risk increases mitigation efforts. We present these results in
more details in the Appendix. Beyond the findings under these default model settings, we also explore
settings where (1) company agents are allowed to spend on building their own resilience, (2) company
agents are initialized with real-world company actions, (3) agents’ decisions are locked in for five
years to simulate capital flexibility challenges, (4) companies’ climate resilience parameter LCi
tare
random and vary across events and companies, and (5) a stricter bankruptcy mechanism. These
experiments yield directional conclusions consistent with those presented in the main text. Detailed
results can be found in the Appendix.
3 Impact and Relevance
We demonstrate the potential of using a MARL framework to inform policy debates in the field of
climate change. Importantly, our results are compatible broadly with the existing theoretical and
empirical literature that examines this question, which shows its validity in predicting directional
behaviors of rational decision makers. Assessing the effectiveness of a policy is inherently challenging,
due to the fact that policy experiments are often prohibitively expensive and impractical to conduct,
and even when they are feasible, it can be extremely time-consuming. Given the urgency of addressing
climate change, our work provides a new vector for studying this problem, creating a simulated
environment where a broad range of regulations can be explored and tested efficiently to provide
novel insights into the problem. For policymakers , InvestESG shows various policy insights,
e.g., mandatory ESG disclosure, paired with highly ESG-conscious investors, can drive corporate
mitigation efforts. For economics and policy researchers , InvestESG introduces MARL as a
promising tool to complement traditional empirical and theoretical methods, allowing scalable policy
testing in a simulated environment. Our model predicts agent behaviors consistent with empirical
evidence and uncovers novel insights. For the machine learning community , InvestESG presents a
novel multi-agent benchmark, fostering the development of RL algorithms that tackle complex social
dilemmas, competition, and long-term strategy—pushing forward AI applications in real-world, high-
impact domains. We encourage the machine learning community to develop algorithmic innovations
for InvestESG that can inspire practical actions to address climate change.
To further improvement our environment setup to accommodate different use cases, we plan to seek
advice from climate change research experts within the CCAI community. Additionally, we plan to
organize a competition where participants can submit solutions for designing regulations or incentives
aimed at achieving an overall reduction in global emissions. For the competition, we will involve
climate experts to evaluate the solutions for their real-world feasibility.
4References
[1]John P. Agapiou, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Edgar A. Duéñez-Guzmán, Jayd Matyas, Yiran
Mao, Peter Sunehag, Raphael Köster, Udari Madhushani, Kavya Kopparapu, Ramona Co-
manescu, DJ Strouse, Michael B. Johanson, Sukhdeep Singh, Julia Haas, Igor Mordatch, Dean
Mobbs, and Joel Z. Leibo. Melting pot 2.0, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
13746 .
[2]Amir Amel-Zadeh and George Serafeim. Why and how investors use esg information: Evidence
from a global survey. Financial analysts journal , 74(3):87–103, 2018.
[3]Matteo Bettini, Ryan Kortvelesy, and Amanda Prorok. Controlling behavioral diversity in
multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15054 , 2024.
[4]Matteo Bettini, Amanda Prorok, and Vincent Moens. Benchmarl: Benchmarking multi-agent
reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(217):1–10, 2024.
[5]Alexander Bisaro and Jochen Hinkel. Governance of social dilemmas in climate change
adaptation. Nature Climate Change , 6(4):354–359, 2016.
[6]Bloomberg News. EU to Delay ESG Reporting Rule for Some Sectors by Two
Years, 2024. URL https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-02-07/
eu-to-delay-esg-reporting-rule-for-some-sectors-by-two-years?
embedded-checkout=true .
[7]Frances E Bowen. Environmental visibility: a trigger of green organizational response? Business
strategy and the environment , 9(2):92–107, 2000.
[8]James M Buchanan and Wm Craig Stubblebine. Externality. In Inframarginal Contributions to
Development Economics , pages 55–73. World Scientific, 2006.
[9]Barbara Buchner. Annual finance for climate action surpasses usd 1 tril-
lion, but far from levels needed to avoid devastating future losses, 2023.
URL https://www.climatepolicyinitiative.org/press-release/
annual-finance-for-climate-action-surpasses-usd-1-trillion-but-far-from-levels-needed-to-avoid-devastating-future-losses/ .
Accessed 27-11-2024.
[10] Micah Carroll, Rohin Shah, Mark K. Ho, Thomas L. Griffiths, Sanjit A. Seshia, Pieter Abbeel,
and Anca Dragan. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination, 2020.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.05789 .
[11] Yi-Chun Chen, Mingyi Hung, and Yongxiang Wang. The effect of mandatory csr disclosure
on firm profitability and social externalities: Evidence from china. Journal of accounting and
economics , 65(1):169–190, 2018.
[12] Soo-Haeng Cho, Xin Fang, Sridhar Tayur, and Ying Xu. Combating child labor: Incentives
and information disclosure in global supply chains. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management , 21(3):692–711, 2019.
[13] CNBC. The sec votes this week on controversial climate change rule:
Here’s what’s at stake, 2024. URL https://www.cnbc.com/2024/03/04/
the-sec-votes-this-week-on-controversial-climate-change-rule-heres-whats-at-stake.
html .
[14] Denis Cormier and Michel Magnan. Corporate environmental disclosure strategies: determi-
nants, costs and benefits. Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance , 14(4):429–451, 1999.
[15] Carl J Dahlman. The problem of externality. The journal of law and economics , 22(1):141–162,
1979.
[16] Aswath Damodaran. Historical returns on stocks, bonds, and bills, 2024. URL https://
pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/histretSP.html . New
York University Stern School of Business.
5[17] Aswath Damodaran. Capital expenditures by sector, 2024. URL https://pages.stern.nyu.
edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/capex.html . Accessed 27-11-2024.
[18] Sebastião Vieira de Freitas Netto, Marcos Felipe Falcão Sobral, Ana Regina Bezerra Ribeiro,
and Gleibson Robert da Luz Soares. Concepts and forms of greenwashing: A systematic review.
Environmental Sciences Europe , 32:1–12, 2020.
[19] Christian Schroeder De Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip HS
Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft
multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 , 2020.
[20] Magali A Delmas and Michael W Toffel. Organizational responses to environmental demands:
Opening the black box. Strategic management journal , 29(10):1027–1055, 2008.
[21] Anil R Doshi, Glen WS Dowell, and Michael W Toffel. How firms respond to mandatory
information disclosure. Strategic Management Journal , 34(10):1209–1231, 2013.
[22] Ishan P. Durugkar, Clemens Rosenbaum, Stefan Dernbach, and Sridhar Mahadevan. Deep
reinforcement learning with macro-actions, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.
04615 .
[23] Javier El-Hage. Fixing esg: Are mandatory esg disclosures the solution to misleading esg
ratings? Fordham J. Corp. & Fin. L. , 26:359, 2021.
[24] European Investment Bank. What drives firms’ investment in climate action?
evidence from the 2022-2023 eib investment survey. Technical report, Euro-
pean Investment Bank, 2023. URL https://www.eib.org/en/publications/
20230114-what-drives-firms-investment-in-climate-change . Accessed: 2024-11-
26.
[25] Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices. Journal of
financial economics , 83(3):667–689, 2007.
[26] J Doyne Farmer, Cameron Hepburn, Penny Mealy, and Alexander Teytelboym. A third wave in
the economics of climate change. Environmental and Resource Economics , 62:329–357, 2015.
[27] Peter Fiechter, Jörg-Markus Hitz, and Nico Lehmann. Real effects of a widespread csr reporting
mandate: Evidence from the european union’s csr directive. Journal of Accounting Research ,
60(4):1499–1549, 2022.
[28] Henry L Friedman and Mirko S Heinle. Taste, information, and asset prices: Implications for
the valuation of csr. Review of Accounting Studies , 21:740–767, 2016.
[29] Henry L Friedman, Mirko Stanislav Heinle, and Irina Luneva. A theoretical framework for esg
reporting to investors. Available at SSRN 3932689 , 2021.
[30] Ramin Gamerschlag, Klaus Möller, and Frank Verbeeten. Determinants of voluntary csr
disclosure: empirical evidence from germany. Review of managerial science , 5:233–262, 2011.
[31] David Gardiner and Associates. Nearly half of fortune 500 companies engaged in major climate
initiatives. https://www.dgardiner.com/fortune-500-climate-initiatives-2023/
#:~:text=There%20are%20now%20239%20Fortune,of%20the%20U.S.%20Fortune%
20500 , 2023. Accessed: 2024-11-26.
[32] Paul Griffin and CR Heede. The carbon majors database. CDP carbon majors report 2017 , 14,
2017.
[33] Uri Hertz, Raphael Koster, Marco Janssen, and Joel Z Leibo. Beyond the matrix: Experimental
approaches to studying social-ecological systems. 2023.
[34] Edward Hughes, Joel Z Leibo, Matthew Phillips, Karl Tuyls, Edgar Dueñez-Guzman, Antonio
García Castañeda, Iain Dunning, Tina Zhu, Kevin McKee, Raphael Koster, et al. Inequity
aversion improves cooperation in intertemporal social dilemmas. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 31, 2018.
6[35] Ioannis Ioannou and George Serafeim. Corporate sustainability: A strategy? Harvard Business
School Accounting & Management Unit Working Paper , (19-065), 2019.
[36] Natasha Jaques, Angeliki Lazaridou, Edward Hughes, Çaglar Gülçehre, Pedro A. Ortega,
DJ Strouse, Joel Z. Leibo, and Nando de Freitas. Intrinsic social motivation via causal influence
in multi-agent RL. CoRR , abs/1810.08647, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
08647 .
[37] Basak Kalkanci and Erica L Plambeck. Managing supplier social and environmental impacts
with voluntary versus mandatory disclosure to investors. Management Science , 66(8):3311–
3328, 2020.
[38] Korea Economic Daily. Korea to enhance esg disclosures as part of corporate sustainabil-
ity efforts, 2023. URL https://www.kedglobal.com/esg/newsView/ked202310160022 .
Accessed: 2024-08-22.
[39] Philipp Krueger, Zacharias Sautner, Dragon Yongjun Tang, and Rui Zhong. The effects of
mandatory esg disclosure around the world. Journal of Accounting Research , 2021.
[40] Joel Z Leibo, Vinicius Zambaldi, Marc Lanctot, Janusz Marecki, and Thore Graepel. Multi-
agent reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03037 ,
2017.
[41] Joel Z Leibo, Edgar A Dueñez-Guzman, Alexander Vezhnevets, John P Agapiou, Peter Sunehag,
Raphael Koster, Jayd Matyas, Charlie Beattie, Igor Mordatch, and Thore Graepel. Scalable
evaluation of multi-agent reinforcement learning with melting pot. In International conference
on machine learning , pages 6187–6199. PMLR, 2021.
[42] Jun Li and Di Wu. Do corporate social responsibility engagements lead to real environmental,
social, and governance impact? Management Science , 66(6):2564–2588, 2020.
[43] Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch.
Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural
information processing systems , 30, 2017.
[44] Antoine Marot, Benjamin Donnot, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Adrian Kelly, Aïdan O’Sullivan, Jan
Viebahn, Mariette Awad, Isabelle Guyon, Patrick Panciatici, and Camilo Romero. Learning to
run a power network challenge: a retrospective analysis. CoRR , abs/2103.03104, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03104 .
[45] Christopher Marquis, Michael W Toffel, and Yanhua Zhou. Scrutiny, norms, and selective
disclosure: A global study of greenwashing. Organization Science , 27(2):483–504, 2016.
[46] V . Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y . Chen,
L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock,
T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou, editors. Climate Change 2021: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2021. In
Press.
[47] MSCI Inc. Msci esg ratings, 2024. URL https://www.msci.com/
sustainable-investing/esg-ratings . Accessed: 2024-09-19.
[48] Mancur Olson Jr. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups, with
a new preface and appendix , volume 124. harvard university press, 1971.
[49] Climate Impact Partners. Fortune global 500 climate commitments,
2024. URL https://www.climateimpact.com/news-insights/
fortune-global-500-climate-commitments/ . Accessed: 2024-11-26.
[50] L’uboš Pástor, Robert F Stambaugh, and Lucian A Taylor. Sustainable investing in equilibrium.
Journal of financial economics , 142(2):550–571, 2021.
7[51] A Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell. Mandatory versus voluntary disclosure of product
risks. The Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization , 28(2):360–379, 2012.
[52] H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig,
S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V . Möller, A. Okem, and B. Rama, editors. Climate Change
2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY , USA, 2022. doi: 10.1017/9781009325844.
[53] Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
20-1364.html .
[54] Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nan-
tas Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon
Whiteson. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043 , 2019.
[55] SEC. The enhancement and standardization of climate-related disclosures for in-
vestors; delay of effective dates, 2024. URL https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2024/04/12/2024-07648/the-enhancement\protect\penalty\z@
-and-standardization-of-climate-related-disclosures-for-investors\
protect\penalty\z@-delay-of-effective . Accessed: 2024-08-22.
[56] SEC. Sec adopts rules to enhance and standardize climate-related disclosures for investors, Mar
2024. URL https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2024-31 .
[57] Yin Shi and Xiaoni Li. An overview of bankruptcy prediction models for corporate firms: A
systematic literature review. Intangible Capital , 15(2):114–127, 2019. ISSN 1697-9818. doi: 10.
3926/ic.1354. URL https://www.intangiblecapital.org/index.php/ic/article/
view/1354 .
[58] P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, R. van Diemen, D. McCollum, M. Pathak,
S. Some, P. Vyas, R. Fradera, M. Belkacemi, A. Hasija, G. Lisboa, S. Luz, and J. Malley,
editors. Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY , USA, 2022. doi: 10.1017/
9781009157926.
[59] Alfonso Siano, Agostino V ollero, Francesca Conte, and Sara Amabile. “more than words”:
Expanding the taxonomy of greenwashing after the volkswagen scandal. Journal of business
research , 71:27–37, 2017.
[60] S&P Global. S&p global esg scores, 2024. URL https://www.marketplace.spglobal.
com/en/datasets/s-p-global-esg-scores-(171) . Accessed: 2024-09-19.
[61] WFE Statistics. Market Capitalisation Q3 2023. World Federation of Ex-
changes , 2023. URL https://focus.world-exchanges.org/articles/
market-capitalisation-q3-2023 . Accessed: 2024-09-27.
[62] Yue Wu, Kaifu Zhang, and Jinhong Xie. Bad greenwashing, good greenwashing: Corporate
social responsibility and information transparency. Management Science , 66(7):3095–3112,
2020.
[63] Jiachen Yang, Ang Li, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Peter Sunehag, Edward Hughes, and Hongyuan
Zha. Learning to incentivize other learning agents. CoRR , abs/2006.06051, 2020. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.06051 .
[64] Zhi Yang, Thi Thu Huong Nguyen, Hoang Nam Nguyen, Thi Thuy Nga Nguyen, and Thi Thanh
Cao. Greenwashing behaviours: Causes, taxonomy and consequences based on a systematic
literature review. Journal of business economics and management , 21(5):1486–1507, 2020.
8[65] Tianyu Zhang, Andrew Williams, Soham Phade, Sunil Srinivasa, Yang Zhang, Prateek Gupta,
Yoshua Bengio, and Stephan Zheng. Ai for global climate cooperation: modeling global climate
negotiations, agreements, and long-term cooperation in rice-n. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07004 ,
2022.
[66] Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, David C. Parkes, and Richard Socher. The AI
economist: Optimal economic policy design via two-level deep reinforcement learning, 2021.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.02755 .
4 Appendix
4.1 Related Work
Creating a benchmark environment that analyzes the interplay between corporations and investors
and their impacts on climate change mitigation requires various domain knowledge and connects
multiple streams of studies. We closely examined three streams of literature.
Conventional economic methods are limited by either generalizability or tractability. Existing
ESG disclosure related research in economics, business, and public policy rely on either empirical data
[21,42,39] or simplified theoretical models [ 51,37,12,50,29]. Empirical analyses, while grounded
in real-world data, struggle with generalizability and testing counterfactual policies. Theoretical
models provide formalized equilibria and explore counterfactuals but are limited by tractability,
modeling either multiple agents in single-period games (e.g., Pástor et al. 50) or only two agents
over limited time periods (e.g., Friedman et al. 29). By proposing a MARL framework, our method
overcomes these limitations by enabling the simulation of complex, multi-agent systems over extended
time horizons under diverse policy settings, which allows for emergent behaviors and better captures
complex socio-economic dynamics among diverse agents [33].
Current MARL benchmarks and social dilemma environments were not designed to model
specific policy problems. Various MARL benchmarks have been created to study multi-agent
coordination and cooperation; however, they are often limited to simplistic particle simulations [ 43]
or videogames [ 1,10,54,4,3], which have little direct real-world implication. Sequential social
dilemmas (SSD) [ 40] are spatially and temporally extended multi-agent environments in which the
payoff to an individual agent for defecting is higher, but if all agents defect the payoff is lower. SSDs
go beyond traditional game-theoretic environments like Prisoner’s Dilemma because the complexity
of the solving the SSD depends on not only addressing the misalignment between individual and
collective rationality, but doing so when the negative consequences of short-sighted actions may take
a long time to manifest. Prior research has examined methods to promote cooperation in SSDs by
incorporating inequity aversion in agents [ 34], rewarding agents for influencing others’ actions [ 36],
enabling agents to provide incentives to others [ 63], and controlling for behavioral diversity [ 3]. Many
of these studies are inspired by factors that drive human cooperation in social dilemmas. However,
much of this research has been conducted in environments with no direct real-world implications
(e.g. Leibo et al. 40,41). In contrast, our environment directly addresses the problem of climate
change, and is designed with critical trade-offs around a certain policy-making question. We hope
to encourage researchers interested in addressing social dilemmas to focus on an environment with
potential impact on the problem of climate change [5].
RL benchmarks can be effective in focusing AI research on climate change issues. Learning
to Run a Power Network (L2RPN) is a single-agent RL benchmark focused on improving power
grid efficiency [ 44]. This work has spawned multiple competitions, and it is currently hosted by
the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) in conjunction with several other energy companies,
government agencies, and universities2. L2RPN continues to foster innovative and meaningful
collaboration across institutions, showing the potential impact of this type of simplified, simulated
RL benchmark. However, L2RPN is focused on single-agent RL, whereas we explore a multi-
agent, multi-party social dilemma. The only other MARL climate benchmark we are aware of was
proposed by [ 65], and is focused on studying the dynamics of international climate negotiations, by
incorporating an integrated assessment model simulating global climate and economic systems. In
contrast, our environment, InvestESG, was designed with a focus on a more targeted policy question
2https://www.epri.com/l2rpn
9(a) Investment matrix for investors with dif-
ferent level of ESG consciousness: 0, 10, 10
(b) Investors with different level of ESG consciousness
make different investment decisions.
Figure 4: Investigating the effects of the level of ESG consciousnessness in the case of 5 companies and 3
investors. ESG consciouness levels are αI0= 0,αI1=αI2= 10 . In (a) and (b), Company 0 is the leading
mitigator out of all the 5 companies. The figure plots the investment distribution for each investor, showing that
more climate-conscious investors focus on investing in the more climate-conscious companies, mirroring the
market bifurcation results of the Schelling diagrams.
(a) ESG-conscious investors can be dis-
tracted by greenwashing.
(b) Mitigation, greenwashing, and climate risk for green-
washing coefficient = 2, 10, 20.
Figure 5: (a) shows ESG-conscious investors can be distracted by greenwashing, and heavily invest in a
company that greenwashes. Here we examine a scenario where Company 0 is hard-coded to invest in real
mitigation while Company 1 only invests in greenwashing. Investors have ESG consciousness level of 0, 1,
10. Part (b) shows that when both companies and investors are IPPO agents, regardless of greenwashing cost,
companies initially explore greenwashing and mitigation equally but quickly abandon greenwashing and invest
in mitigation to attract ESG-conscious investors. In these experiments, the final climate risk is similar to the
value when greenwashing is not enabled, suggesting greenwashing does not hinder mitigation investment.
regarding ESG disclosure mandates, making our approach more directly applicable to an ongoing
and highly debated policy issue.
4.2 Additional Results
Heterogeneous investor preference. Research shows that investors have varying preferences for ESG
efforts and respond in different ways [ 2]. In this scenario, we initialized three investors with different
levels of ESG-consciousness, with Investor 0 representing the solely profit-seeking investor with
ESG-preference set to αI0= 0, and Investor 1 and 2 representing highly ESG-conscious investors
withαI1=αI2= 10 , which matches the scenario presented in the Schelling diagram in Figure
2b. Figure 4a and 4b highlight a divergence in both investor and company behavior. Profit-driven
investor 0 distributes investments evenly across companies, while ESG-focused investors (1 and 2)
favor climate-conscious firms, such as Company 0, which prioritizes mitigation. Such divergence
extends to company strategies: Company 0 learns to attract more ESG investment by focusing on
mitigation, while others prioritize financial returns at the expense of some investor interest.
Option to greenwash. Building on research that examines the existence and extent of greenwashing
[62,45,59], and the concern that the ESG disclosure policy can backfire with greenwashing [ 23],
we explore whether companies adjust their strategies when greenwashing is permitted. Based on
the Schelling diagram in Figure 2d and Figure 4b, we predict that investors would be misled by
greenwashing, prompting companies to prioritize greenwashing over mitigation due to its lower cost,
leading to waste of resources. However, this prediction is not observed when simulating agents
with IPPO. Figure 5b plots results under varying greenwashing costs, represented by coefficient
βin Equation 3, where a larger βindicates cheaper greenwashing. All investors have an ESG-
consciousness level of α= 1. The results show that regardless of greenwashing cost, companies
initially explore greenwashing and mitigation equally but quickly drop greenwashing as the main
strategy.
10(a) More information for investors and companies
 (b) More information for companies (no investors)
Figure 6: Effect of providing more information about climate risk to both investors and companies in the
default 5-company-3-investor case (a), or companies only in a 5-company-0-investor case (b). These results
show that simply providing more information about climate risk to companies can help them coordinate to
increase mitigation efforts.
This likely occurs because, in the early episodes, investors have not yet linked ESG scores to their
investment strategies, so do not respond to greenwashing efforts with increased investment. Instead,
greenwashing presents an immediate cost for companies, which does not pay off with reduced climate
risk, so they quickly learn to avoid it. In contrast, even without immediate investor rewards, companies
may recognize the long-term benefits of mitigation (which leads to higher collective returns), and
be incentivized to continue those efforts at first, even if they later learn to defect. This mirrors
reality, where if investors are slow to adjust their strategies, companies may abandon greenwashing
early but persist in low levels of mitigation for either its long-term climate benefits or the foresight
of regulations and societal pressure that will eventually nudge them towards sustainable operation
anyway. This is consistent with some empirical literature stating that despite the emergence of some
greenwashing, ESG disclosure mandates overall encourage mitigation [27].
Additional information. In this scenario, we want to observe the effect of having additional
climate-related information available on mitigation behavior. Therefore, we provide the climate event
probability and climate event occurrences as additional information in the observation space for both
companies and investors. In the default 5-company-3-investor scenario, having additional climate-
related information reduces the ending system climate risks, as shown in Figures 6a. Figure 6b show
similar effects of having additional climate-related information in the scenario where investors are
not present. This result suggests that climate-related information helps both companies and investors
make better environmental decisions. Even in the absence of ESG-focused investors, educating
companies about the overall system improves outcomes. This aligns with literature showing that
raising awareness encourages positive corporate responses [20, 7].
Scale up the number of agents. Figure 7a - 7b show the experiment results when the number of
company and investor agents are scaled up to 25-by-25. The increased number of agents reveal the
same directional story as the main results shown in Figure 3, where highly ESG-conscious investors
motivate mitigation efforts from companies, resulting in lower ending climate risk and higher total
market wealth. Figure 7c-7d zoom into a single episode of the 10-company, 10-investor case, with
investor ESG-consciousness set to 0 and 10, respectively. In the ideal case where all investors are
highly ESG-conscious, one leading mitigating company attracts the majority of the investment, which
is consistent with the pattern shown in Figure 4a.
Effects of resilience spending. In this case, we allow companies to invest in resilience spending to
improve their own robustness to climate events, without affecting the global climate risk. Although
investors continue to respond to companies’ ESG scores, resilience spending is excluded from the
calculation of ESG scores. As shown in Figure 8a, when resilience is allowed, companies invest
significantly more in resilience than in mitigation. By investing in resilience, companies are more
resilient to the climate event and therefore are able to maintain more capital to invest in actual
mitigation, compared to the case when resilience is not allowed, reflected in 8c. Therefore mitigation
spending when resilience is allowed is actually slightly higher compared to when it is not an option,
resulting in comparable final climate risk in Figure 8b. This suggests that companies are financially
incentivized to prioritize resilience investments, which can actually enable a greater commitment to
climate mitigation efforts.
Seeding companies with real-world data. To ground the agents in real-world data, we seeded com-
pany agents’ actions with real-world corporate behaviors. According to [ 31,24,49], approximately
50% of large companies are currently investing in climate mitigation. Globally, about 1% of GDP
is allocated to climate finance annually [ 9]. Since GDP can be roughly viewed as the counterpart
11(a) Ending climate risk of 25 companies and 25
investors.
(b) Ending total market wealth of 25 companies
and 25 investors.
(c) Company capital over time, company ESG score over time, and investment matrix of 10 companies
and 10 investors with ESG consciousness = 0 in one episode.
(d) Company capital over time, company ESG score over time, and investment matrix of 10 companies
and 10 investors with ESG consciousness = 10 in one episode.
Figure 7: (a)(b) shows the final climate risk and market total wealth for the case of 25 companies and 25
investors. Similar to the default 5-company-and-3-investor case, when investors are highly conscious, the
final climate risk would be decreased. (c)(d) shows the ending episode company capitals over time, company
ESG score over time, and investment matrix of environments with 10 companies. When investors are ESG
conscious, the investments are more concentrated on the mitigating company compared to the case when the
investors are not ESG conscious. Consequently, the capitals of mitigating companies are much larger compared
to non-mitigating companies in the case when the investors are ESG conscious, while the capitals of mitigating
companies are comparable to non-mitigating companies when the investors are not ESG conscious.
of a company’s sales, and based on data from an NYU database [ 17], which estimates the average
sales-to-capital ratio across sectors to be between 0.8 and 1.28, we approximate sales and capital to
be of similar magnitudes. Consequently, we seeded 50% of companies to invest between 0.5% and
1% of their total capital into mitigation, reflecting real-world investment levels. As shown in Figures
8d, 8e, and 8f, when seeded with real data, the total corporate mitigation efforts and resulting climate
risk levels eventually align closely with the baseline scenario.
Lock-in investments. In reality, the decision-making processes of both companies and investors
can be less flexible than modeled, where companies and investors update their strategies annually.
To reflect the capital inflexibility, we implemented a 5-year lock-in period for agent decisions. This
12(a) Mitigation and resilience spend-
ing
(b) Climate risk
 (c) Market total wealth
(d) Mitigation spending
 (e) Climate risk
 (f) Market total wealth
(g) Mitigation spending
 (h) Climate risk
 (i) Market total wealth
Figure 8: (a)-(c) Effect of allowing resilience spending. (d)-(f) Effect of seeding with real-world data. (g)-(i)
Effect of 5-year lock-in period for agent decisions. All comparisons are made against the default case with an
ESG disclosure mandate, in which investors have zero ESG-consciousness, and company acitions are restricted
to mitigation efforts only.
approach allows the climate to evolve more rapidly than agents can respond. Despite this constraint,
the results remain consistent with the directional findings presented in the main text, as illustrated
in Figures 8g, 8h and 8i, suggesting that agents would achieve similar results using a macro-action
reinforcement learning approach [ 22]. However, the learning curves for the locked-in investment
cases exhibit greater volatility and slower convergence compared to the default case, indicating that
capital inflexibility indeed increases the challenges of addressing climate change.
Uncertain climate event damage. Given the significant uncertainty surrounding the economic
damages of climate change [ 26], we conducted additional experiments where companies’ resilience
parameters, LCi
t, representing economic losses from extreme climate events, were modeled as
Gaussian random variables LCi
t∼ N (µ, σ)clipped within the range [0,1], varying across both
events and companies. This randomness allows for extreme climate damages, including the potential
bankruptcy of some companies, which could incentivize risk-averse strategies where companies
engage in greater mitigation efforts. Conversely, the randomness complicates the ability of company
agents to learn the long-term benefits of mitigation, potentially encouraging short-sighted behaviors
or greenwashing.
Figures 9a to 9c illustrate the effects of uncertain climate event damage compared to the default
mandate case, where no investors are ESG-conscious, and company actions are restricted to mitigation
only. Both scenarios result in similar levels of total mitigation and climate risk. However, agents
in the uncertain damage scenario require more time to learn the optimal mitigation level due to the
increased uncertainty in the environment. Despite the similarities, the uncertain damage scenario
13(a) Mitigation spending
 (b) Climate risk
 (c) Market total wealth
(d) Mitigation spending
 (e) Climate risk
 (f) Market total wealth
 (g) Greenwash spending
(h) Mitigation spending
 (i) Climate risk
 (j) Market total wealth
 (k) Number of bankrupt
companies
Figure 9: (a)-(c) Effect of uncertain climate event damage. (d)-(g) Effect of uncertain climate event damage on
greenwash spending. (h)-(k) Effect of a more strick bankruptcy mechanism and its combination with uncertain
climate event damage.
results in significantly lower total market wealth due to potentially some high-tail losses in early years.
When considering the wealth discrepancy, companies in the uncertain damage scenario ultimately
adopt a more aggressive mitigation strategy relative to their capital. This behavior suggests that the
high uncertainty may have prompted risk-averse strategies.
Uncertain climate event damage also incentivizes the companies to focus more on short-term benefits
by attracting investments, compared to the case with fixed damage when the companies first explore
greenwashing strategy and then settle down on doing little greenwashing. As shown in 9d to 9g, when
threatened with uncertain climate event damage, companies increase their greenwashing amount to
attract immediate investments from ESG-consciouns investors.
Stricter bankruptcy mechanism. Additionally, to make our model more enriched, we implemented
a more strict bankruptcy mechanism for company agents: if a company agent has a margin worse
than negative 10% for 3 consecutive years, a red flag signaling potential financial distress, is deemed
as bankrupt [ 57]. As shown in the comparison between orange and pink lines in 9h, 9i and 9j, the
new bankruptcy mechanism does not cause significant difference in the level of mitigation from the
status quo with mandate case. Given that the market growth rate is high, companies are not severely
threatened by bankruptcy despite that the new bankruptcy mechanism is in place, and therefore refrain
from investing in climate mitigation.
However, when the stricter bankruptcy mechanism is combined with uncertain climate event damage,
as depicted by the green lines in Figures 9h and 9k, a significant increase in mitigation and more
bankruptcies are observed. This indicates that the combination of uncertain climate event damage
and the bankruptcy mechanism creates an immediate risk of bankruptcy for company agents, thereby
strongly incentivizing their mitigation efforts.
144.3 Technical details of the InvestESG environment
The simulation starts in 2021 and runs through 2120, with each period tcorresponding to one year.
The environment includes two main components: (1) an evolving climate and economic system, and
(2) two types of agents: Mcompany agents Cifori∈ {1, . . . , M }andNinvestor agents Ijfor
j∈ {1, . . . , N }.Climate and Economic Dynamics. The environment is characterized by three
climate risk parameters: extreme heat probability ( Ph
t), heavy precipitation probability ( Pp
t), and
drought probability ( Pd
t) in year t. Initial climate risks are set to Ph
0= 0.28,Pp
0= 0.13, and
Pd
0= 0.17following the IPCC estimate [ 46], resulting in an overall climate risk of P0= 0.48, the
probability of at least one adverse climate event in a year. Without mitigation efforts, these risks
increase linearly over time, reaching the IPCC’s 4 scenario scenario by 2100, which corresponds to
the 80th period in our 100-period simulation. By that point, we observe Ph
80= 0.94,Pp
80= 0.27,
andPd
80= 0.41(or an overall climate risk of P80= 0.97). We then extrapolate this trend through to
period 100. Figure 10a depicts how increased climate risks and adverse climate events increase over
time in a scenario where companies are solely profit-motivated. Company agents can mitigate the
growth of climate risk by investing in emissions reduction. The change in climate risk Pe
tfor event
e∈ {h, p, d}in year tis governed by the function:
Pe
t=µet
1 +λeUt,m+Pe
0,fore∈ {h, p, d}, (1)
where Ut,mis the cumulative mitigation spending from all agents by period t. IfUt,m= 0, risks
increase linearly to reach Pe
80by 2100 as explained earlier. When Ut,m>0, the growth rate of
climate risk decreases. The parameters λeare calibrated based on [ 58], which estimates that an
annual mitigation investment of $2.3 trillion is required to achieve IPCC’s 1.5 scenario. The model
fitsλeso that such investment levels would yield 1.5 scenario climate risks by 2100. Climate events
are modeled as independent Bernoulli processes, allowing for multiple events within a year (red
dashed lines in Figure 10a). Let Xt,h, Xt,p, Xt,e∈ {0,1}represent the occurrence of each climate
event, and Xtdenote the total number of events in period t, determined by Equation 2.
Xt=Xt,h+Xt,p+Xt,e,where Xt,e∼Bernoulli (Pe
t),fore∈ {h, p, d}. (2)
In addition to the evolving climate risks, the environment incorporates a baseline economic growth
rateγ, set to 10% by default, aligned with the historical average annual return of the S&P 500 over
the past century [ 16]. Company agents’ capital levels KCi
tgrow at rate γeach year, barring climate
events. If an adverse event occurs, company agents lose a portion of their total capital according to
their respective climate resilience parameter LCi
t. If economic losses drive a company’s remaining
capital into negative territory, the company is declared bankrupt.
Company Action Space. Each company agent Ciin period tselects actions from a continuous
vector uCi
t= (uCi
t,m, uCi
t,g, uCi
t,r), where uCi
t,mrepresents the share of capital allocated to mitigation,
uCi
t,gto greenwashing, and uCi
t,rto building climate resilience. The action space for each company
is defined as a continuous 3-dimensional unit cube, UCi
t= [0,1]3. If the sum of the three ratios
exceeds 1 in any period, the company agent is deemed to be overspending, resulting in bankruptcy.
Mitigation spending directly reduces the system-wide climate risk as explained above. Greenwashing
involves deceptive marketing or accounting tactics that allow companies to appear climate-friendly at
a low cost without providing any real benefits to society [18, 64]. Resilience spending enhances the
company’s climate resilience by lowering its vulnerability LCi
t, but it does not reduce emissions and
therefore does not mitigate system-wide climate risk. In the default setting, we disable greenwashing
and resilience spending to focus on testing companies’ mitigation efforts. .
Investor Action Space. Investor agents first select the companies they want to invest in. Specifically,
agentIjin period tselects an action from a binary vector of length M,aIj
t= (aIj
t,1, . . . , aIj
t,M),
corresponding to the Mcompany agents. Each entry aIj
t,i= 1 indicates that investor Ijinvests
in company Ciin period t, and aIj
t,i= 0 otherwise. The investor’s action space at time tis thus
AIj
t={0,1}M. Once the choices are made, investors capitals are distributed equally among these
chosen companies, as will be detailed later in Equation 4.
15(a) Environment dynamics over the
course of a single 100 year episode.
0 20 40 60 80
Years468101214Average Severe Events (per 10 years)Severe Climate Events Over Time (10-Year)
Number of Severe Climate Events Within 10-Year
(b) Average number of severe climate
event occurrences over 10-year period.
Figure 10: Status quo scenario where
all agents are only profit-motivated. In
(a), mitigation spending (blue curve) is
minimal, leading climate risk (yellow
curve) to increase over time. Adverse
weather event occurrences are shown as
dotted lines; red lines indicate multiple
adverse events in a single year. In (b),
increasing climate risk leads to more
frequent occurrence of severe climate
events over time.Modeling ESG Disclosure. With the ESG disclosure mandate
in place, each company agent receives an updated ESG score
QCi
t+1in period t, calculated as
QCi
t+1=uCi
t,m+βuCi
t,g, (3)
where β >1indicates that greenwashing is cheaper than gen-
uine mitigation in terms of building an ESG-friendly image.
This mirrors simple ESG ratings provided by some agencies,
which typically range from 1 to 100 [ 60] or use letter-based
ratings [47].
State and Observation Space. The environment simulates
a partially observable Markov game Mdefined over a con-
tinuous, multi-dimensional state space. The system state at
period tis characterized by the three climate risk parame-
tersPt= (Ph
t, Pp
t, Pd
t), each company agent’s state vector
SCi
t= (KCi
t, QCi
t, LCi
t), where KCi
tis the capital level, QCi
t
is the ESG score, and LCi
tis the climate resilience. Each in-
vestor agent’s state is represented by their investment portfolio
and cash levels SIj
t= (HIj
t,1, . . . , HIj
t,M, CIj
t), where HIj
t,irep-
resents investor Ij’s holdings in company Ci, and CIj
tis the
investor’s cash level. The full system state at period tis thus
St=
Pt,{SCi
t}M
i=1,{SIj
t}N
j=1
. All company and investor
agents share a common observation space, denoted as Ot. In
the default setting, Ot=
{SCi
t}M
i=1,{SIj
t}N
j=1
. Extensions
that incorporate additional observable information, like climate
risk, are explored in experiment results.
State Transition. The environment’s state transition Tpro-
ceeds as follows. At the beginning of period t, investors collect
their investment holdings from period t−1and redistribute
their capital according to aIj
t. Denote ||at||Ij
1=PM
i=1aIj
t,ias
the number of companies investor Ijinvests in during period t
and let KIj
t=PM
i=1HIj
t,i+CIj
trepresent the total capital of
investor Ijat the start of period t. Companies reach an interim
capital level after returning old investments,PN
j=1HIj
t,i, and receiving new ones, with the investment
from investor Ijcalculated as aIj
t,iKIj
t
||at||Ij
1or0if the investor opts out of investing, as shown in
Equation 4.
KCi
t+1,interim =KCi
t−NX
j=1HIj
t,i+NX
j=1aIj
t,iKIj
t
||at||Ij
1,fori= 1, . . . , M (4)
Companies then make climate-related spending using the interim capital, as described in Equations 5
to 6. Here, Ut,mrepresents the cumulative mitigation spending by all company agents up to period t,
while UCi
t,rdenotes the cumulative resilience spending by company Ci.
Ut,m=Ut−1,m+MX
i=1uCi
t,m×KCi
t+1,interim (5)
UCi
t,r=UCi
t−1,r+uCi
t,r×KCi
t+1,interim fori= 1, . . . , M (6)
While Ut,mis then plugged into Equation 1 where system climate risks are updated. Equation 7 states
that a company’s climate resilience, LCi
t, scales with the proportion of cumulative resilience invest-
ment relative to its capital, and that increasing resilience becomes progressively more challenging
16due to diminishing returns [52].
LCi
t=LCi
0exp (−ηCiUCi
t−1,r+uCi
t,rKCi
t+1,interim
KCi
t+1,interim),fori= 1, . . . , M. (7)
At the same time, the occurrence of climate events are simulated according to Equation 2, and
companies receive updated ESG scores based on Equation 3. Afterwards, companies’ profit margins,
ρCi
t, are computed using Equation 8, factoring in climate-related spendings uCi
t,m,uCi
t,g,uCi
t,r, default
economic growth γ, and losses due to climate events, which are influenced by companies’ climate
vulnerability LCi
tand the number of climate events Xtas defined in Equation 2:
ρCi
t= (1−uCi
t,m−uCi
t,g−uCi
t,r)(1 + γ)(1−XtLCi
t)−1,fori= 1, . . . , M. (8)
Company capitals KCi
t+1, investor holdings HIj
t+1,i, and investor cash positions CIj
t+1are updated
according to Equations 9 to 11. Company capitals KCi
t+1are updated according to Equation 9 by
scaling the interim capital levels by profit margin.
KCi
t+1= (1 + ρCi
t)KCi
t+1,interim ,fori= 1, . . . , M. (9)
Equation 10 adjusts investor holdings based on company profit margins in their portfolios.
HIj
t+1,i=aIj
t,i(1 +ρCi
t)KIj
t
||at||Ij
1,fori= 1, . . . , M, j = 1, . . . , N. (10)
If an investor chooses not to invest, all capital remains as cash, as shown in Equation 11
CIj
t+1=(
0, if||at||Ij
1̸= 0
KIj
t,if||at||Ij
1= 0,forj= 1, . . . , N. (11)
Rewards. The single-period reward for company Ciis solely based on its profit margin, given by
rCi
t=KCi
t+1−KCi
t+1,interim fori= 1, . . . , M , reflecting the assumption that companies are profit-
driven. The reward for investor IjisrIj
t=KIj
t+1−KIj
t
KIj
t+αIjPM
i=1HIj
t+1,iQCi
t+1PM
i=1KIj
t+1forj= 1, . . . , N .
The first component is the portfolio return ratio, and the second component represents the weighted
average ESG score of the investor’s portfolio adjusted by the investor’s ESG preference, αIj.
Social Outcome Metrics. We evaluate agent performance based on two key social outcome metrics:
the final climate risk level, P100, defined as P100= 1−(1−Ph
100)(1−Pp
100)(1−Pd
100), and the
total market wealth at the end of the period, W100, defined as W100=PM
i=1KCi
100+PN
j=1KIj
100.
4.4 Implementation details
4.5 Independent-PPO
To test how self-interest agents learn to respond to incentives in the environment, we employ a state-
of-the-art MARL algorithm based on Independent PPO. Each agent has its own policy parameters,
and agents do not share parameters among themselves. This is because we are interested in simulating
companies and investors as independent, selfishly motivated agents that specialize in maximizing
their own expected reward. The policy model is a simple Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) network,
with input as the capital, resilience and margin of each company, along with the investments and
capital of each investor. Additional information can be added to the observation. All company and
investor agents share a common observation space. To implement Independent-PPO with different
roles, we built upon the Stable Baseline 3 repository [ 53]. Each policy model is an MLP network
with two layers of size 256 and 128 and with tanh activation layers, and update each policy after 5
episodes during the training. See Table 1 for more details.
In the default setting, we assign equal amount of initial capitals to companies and investors, which is
a rough representation of the current market. For each experimental scenario, we run the learning
algorithms for 30k episodes, over 3 trials with different random seeds.
17MLP layers Activation layers PPO n_steps PPO learning
ratePPO entropy
coefficientGradient
Clipping
256, 128 tanh 500 3e-5 0.01 0.2
Table 1: IPPO policy training parameters. The rest of the parameters are the default as described in
Stable Baselines 3 [53].
18