Towards CLEAN:
Cycle Learning Energy-Emission Assessment Network
Yanming Guo1, Qian Xiao2, Kevin Credit2, Jin Ma1
1University of Sydney,2Maynooth University
{yguo0337, j.ma}@sydney.edu.au ,{qian.xiao, kevin.credit}@mu.ie
Abstract
Formulating effective climate policies is challenging due to the limitations of
current decision-making models, such as Computable General Equilibrium models,
which often rely on static, linear assumptions that oversimplify complex, real-
world scenarios. To address these limitations, we introduce the Cycle Learning
Energy-Emission Assessment Network, a scalable deep-learning framework trained
on the proposed Carbon Monitor Energy-Emission time series dataset. CLEAN
captures global patterns between energy structures and sectoral carbon emissions,
enabling accurate energy-emission predictions at national, provincial, city, and
sectoral levels. By framing the problem as a bidirectional supervised regression
task, our model achieves a Mean Absolute Percentage Error of approximately 5%,
significantly outperforming traditional models like XGBoost, especially with our
novel data augmentation method, Densify. This demonstrates CLEAN’s superior
performance and generalization capabilities, making it a powerful tool for climate
policy analysis. The CMEE dataset, CLEAN model, and Densify augmentation
methods are open-sourced at https://github.com/Yvnminc/CLEAN .
1 Introduction
The United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 7 calls for a global shift to affordable and clean
energy, emphasizing its role in reducing dependence on fossil fuels and highlighting the broader
environmental and economic benefits of sustainable energy [ 3,23]. In alignment with this objective,
the Paris Agreement was established with the ambitious target of keeping the global temperature rise
well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels [ 17,9]. This commitment has led countries
worldwide to implement substantial energy and industrial transition policies [5, 12, 15].
Traditional policy-making in this context often relies on economic models like Computable General
Equilibrium (CGE) models [ 24,26]. While these models offer a structured approach to understanding
economic outcomes, they are built on simplified assumptions and static frameworks [1, 19, 7]. As a
result, they fall short in capturing the complex, dynamic interactions between energy systems and
markets, and they lack the flexibility to adapt to varying future scenarios [ 14,18]. This limitation
poses significant challenges for climate policy development, which requires adaptive strategies to
accommodate long-term goals, such as the commitment of many developed nations to achieve net-
zero emissions by 2050. The uncertainties inherent in a 30-year planning horizon further complicate
the creation of effective policies, as they must account for unpredictable technological, economic,
and social changes [21, 6, 20].
2 Pathway Impact of Machine Learning for Climate Policy Making
This research focuses on a data-driven machine-learning approach. The proposed model, CLEAN for
climate policy-making, demonstrates clear advantages and impactful pathways over CGE models
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2024.Figure 1: The Cycle Learning Energy-Emission Assessment Network (CLEAN) framework predicts
national-level energy demand and emissions based on energy mix and sectoral emission structure.
This model learns global patterns from the Carbon Monitor Energy-Emission dataset across scales,
offering insights for policy formulation and feasibility assessments.
[22,27,25]. Specifically, unlike CGE models, which are limited by their static assumptions and
localized scope. CLEAN identifies scalable global patterns across national, provincial, city, and
sectoral . By understanding that a nation’s energy profile is an aggregate of its sectors, CLEAN effec-
tively captures how different energy mixes influence total carbon emissions and how sector-specific
emissions contribute to the overall energy demand. CLEAN demonstrates high generalization
ability for various downstream prediction tasks . It can predict daily emissions for unseen countries
where direct emissions data is unavailable by using accessible power generation data. CLEAN
supports bidirectional prediction for policy simulation . The model is designed to help determine
the optimal energy mix required to meet specific emission reduction targets, automatically identifying
a feasible energy structure. This capability is crucial for developing sustainable energy policies and
ensuring that emission goals are both realistic and achievable.
3 Carbon Monitor Energy-Emission Time Series Data
Table 1: Detail Information of Carbon Monitor Energy-Emission (CMEE) Time Series Dataset.
Characteristics Number Description
Spatial Coverage 12 Regions (e.g. China, France, United States)
Temporal Coverage 2008 Daily granularity from 01/01/2019 to 30/06/2024
Energy Type 8 Energy source (e.g. Coal, Gas, Solar)
Emission Type 6 Secotral emission (e.g. Transportation, Industry, Power)
We have developed a comprehensive, high-resolution Energy-Emission time series dataset CMEE
based on the Carbon Monitor project to understand the relationship between power generation and
CO2emissions, which is crucial for evaluating national energy and sectorial transition policies. The
Carbon Monitor is an international initiative providing regularly updated, science-based estimates of
daily carbon emissions and power generation data for 12 countries, covering the period from January
1, 2019, to June 30, 2024 [ 13,10]. Our dataset includes data on eight types of energy sources and six
categories of sectoral emissions, spanning a total of 24,096 days (2,008 days each for 12 countries).
It integrates two independently collected but related datasets, ensuring consistency through structured
formatting and noise reduction techniques such as Gaussian filtering. This unified dataset serves as a
robust foundation for machine learning tasks and supports further research, including data mining,
causal analysis, and time series forecasting. (See detailed data analysis in Appendix).
24 Methodology
Although the CMEE dataset is fundamentally time-series data, the conversion relationship between
energy and emissions is independent of time. The CMEE dataset is formatted in a tabular structure
and designed to have three main numerical components: proportion ( p), a vector representing the
proportions of various energy uses and sectoral emissions; total energy ( en), indicating the daily
power generation of a country; and total emissions ( em), representing the daily CO 2emissions.
Therefore, we formulate this problem as a bidirectional supervised regression task. Specifically,
to predict total emissions ( em), we aim to learn a mapping fθ: [p1, p2, . . . , p n, en]7→em, where
the input vector is the concatenation of the proportion vector ( p), total energy ( en), and θdenotes
the model parameters. Similarly, to predict total energy generation ( en), the mapping function is
defined as fθ: [p1, p2, . . . , p n, em]7→en. This bidirectional setup allows the model to utilize both
energy mix and emissions data for accurate predictions, ensuring that it captures the mutual influence
between energy use and emissions without being dependent on temporal order. This method also
enhances the model’s generalizability to different contexts, making it robust across various scales and
regions, as illustrated in Figure 1.
To achieve this, we propose the Cycle Learning Energy-Emission Assessment Network (CLEAN),
a deep neural network-based framework designed to learn global patterns between energy power
generation and sectoral emissions. The model uses two encoders to capture the features for Energy-
to-Emission and Emission-to-Energy mappings separately. The Cycle loss allows the model to learn
more robust and generalized patterns. It is introduced as a regularization term to enforce consis-
tency between these tasks inspired by CycleGAN [ 28]. Thereby Additionally, we proposed a data
augmentation technique called Densify to address the sparsity inherent in tabular data, significantly
enhancing model performance over traditional models like XGBoost (See detailed model selection,
design and augmentation methods in Appendix).
5 Experiments & Results
To evaluate the effectiveness of the CLEAN framework, we conducted a series of experiments using
a country-based holdout approach rather than a traditional random split. The data was divided into
60% training countries, 20% validation countries, and 20% test countries. This approach provides a
more rigorous test of the model’s generalization abilities across different geographical contexts. The
results, summarized in Table 2, demonstrate that deep learning models with MLP and CNN encoders
generally outperform traditional machine learning models.
Table 2: Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) for Energy to Emission and Emission to Energy
models with densification levels n. Here, nrepresents the number of synthesized countries; the more
synthesized countries, the denser the training data space, and vice versa. The top results are in bold .
It can be observed that deep learning models generally outperform traditional learning models, and
those trained with the CLEAN framework and Cycle loss achieve the best performance.
CMEE 0 CMEE 10 CMEE 100
Model Emission Energy Emission Energy Emission Energy
LR [8] 0.423 0.347 0.243 0.128 0.104 0.101
KNN [4] 0.309 0.461 0.349 0.316 0.070 0.102
DT [16] 0.768 1.256 0.402 0.450 0.094 0.128
XGB [2] 0.359 1.166 0.374 0.370 0.070 0.112
MLP [11] 0.136 0.157 0.183 0.112 0.056 0.049
CNN [11] 0.206 0.273 0.259 0.201 0.062 0.050
CLEAN MLP 0.118 0.111 0.125 0.110 0.051 0.057
CLEAN CNN 0.133 0.196 0.178 0.191 0.048 0.054
We evaluated various models across different levels of data augmentation, and the results show that
as the amount of synthetic data ( n) increases, all models experience a significant decrease in MAPE,
indicating that data augmentation substantially improves generalization performance. Interestingly,
even a simple Linear Regression (LR) model outperformed more advanced models like XGBoost
(XGB) in our regression tasks. This is because LR effectively captures continuous relationships,
whereas XGB, which is optimized for discrete data, has difficulty generalizing to continuous patterns.
3Figure 2: Daily emission predictions for Permanent Five using the CLEAN CNN model.
The CLEAN framework, incorporating Cycle loss, performed exceptionally well on sparser datasets
(Densify 0and Densify 10), suggesting that Cycle loss adds valuable inductive bias and regularization.
However, on denser datasets such as Densify 100, the difference in performance decreases, and MLP
achieves the best results, indicating that Cycle loss becomes less important with more densely
populated data. Overall, the CLEAN framework consistently maintains a very low MAPE, even when
predicting outcomes for unseen countries, demonstrating its robust generalization capabilities.
6 Conclusion
Our research makes three key contributions. First, we introduce a deep neural network framework
CLEAN to support climate policy-making . The Cycle Learning Energy-Emission Assessment
Network provides a data-driven, transparent policy-making tool by capturing complex, non-linear
relationships between energy use and emissions. Second, we developed the Energy-Emission time
series dataset based on the Carbon Monitor project . Providing a solid foundation for future
research in causal inference, data mining, and time series analysis. Third, the CLEAN model
employs the innovative Cycle loss and a new data augmentation method, Densify, to handle
sparse training data effectively . This model outperforms traditional machine learning models like
XGBoost, achieving a Mean Absolute Percentage Error of just 5% on unseen countries, demonstrating
strong generalization abilities. All data, models, and code from our study are open-source, providing
valuable resources for the community. Our research impacts climate policy-making in three ways:
Learning Global Patterns Across Scales , applicable to national, provincial, city, and sectoral levels;
Supporting Multiple Downstream Tasks , helpful in predicting emissions in regions without direct
carbon monitoring; and Bidirectional Prediction for Policy Simulation , enabling the setting of
emission reduction targets and identification of optimal energy strategies. Our framework advances
climate policy modelling and offers practical tools for more effective and informed policymaking.
4References
[1]Christoph Böhringer and Andreas Löschel. Computable general equilibrium models for sus-
tainability impact assessment: Status quo and prospects. Ecological economics , 60(1):49–64,
2006.
[2]Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of
the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pages
785–794, 2016.
[3]William Colglazier. Sustainable development agenda: 2030. Science , 349(6252):1048–1050,
2015.
[4]Thomas Cover and Peter Hart. Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE transactions on
information theory , 13(1):21–27, 1967.
[5]Rajvikram Madurai Elavarasan, Rishi Pugazhendhi, Taskin Jamal, Joanna Dyduch, Moham-
mad Taufiqul Arif, Nallapaneni Manoj Kumar, GM Shafiullah, Shauhrat S Chopra, and Mithu-
lananthan Nadarajah. Envisioning the un sustainable development goals (sdgs) through the lens
of energy sustainability (sdg 7) in the post-covid-19 world. Applied Energy , 292:116665, 2021.
[6]Francesco Fuso Nerini, Benjamin Sovacool, Nick Hughes, Laura Cozzi, Ellie Cosgrave, Mark
Howells, Massimo Tavoni, Julia Tomei, Hisham Zerriffi, and Ben Milligan. Connecting climate
action with other sustainable development goals. Nature Sustainability , 2(8):674–680, 2019.
[7]Maurizio Gargiulo and Brian O Gallachoir. Long-term energy models: Principles, characteristics,
focus, and limitations. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment , 2(2):158–177,
2013.
[8]Arthur E Hoerl and Robert W Kennard. Ridge regression: Biased estimation for nonorthogonal
problems. Technometrics , 12(1):55–67, 1970.
[9]Niklas Höhne, Takeshi Kuramochi, Carsten Warnecke, Frauke Röser, Hanna Fekete, Markus
Hagemann, Thomas Day, Ritika Tewari, Marie Kurdziel, Sebastian Sterl, et al. The paris
agreement: resolving the inconsistency between global goals and national contributions. Climate
Policy , 17(1):16–32, 2017.
[10] Da Huo, Xiaoting Huang, Xinyu Dou, Philippe Ciais, Yun Li, Zhu Deng, Yilong Wang, Duo
Cui, Fouzi Benkhelifa, Taochun Sun, et al. Carbon monitor cities near-real-time daily estimates
of co2 emissions from 1500 cities worldwide. Scientific Data , 9(1):533, 2022.
[11] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature , 521(7553):436–444,
2015.
[12] Bandy X Lee, Finn Kjaerulf, Shannon Turner, Larry Cohen, Peter D Donnelly, Robert Muggah,
Rachel Davis, Anna Realini, Berit Kieselbach, Lori Snyder MacGregor, et al. Transforming
our world: implementing the 2030 agenda through sustainable development goal indicators.
Journal of public health policy , 37:13–31, 2016.
[13] Zhu Liu, Philippe Ciais, Zhu Deng, Steven J Davis, Bo Zheng, Yilong Wang, Duo Cui, Biqing
Zhu, Xinyu Dou, Piyu Ke, et al. Carbon monitor, a near-real-time daily dataset of global co2
emission from fossil fuel and cement production. Scientific data , 7(1):392, 2020.
[14] Irene Monasterolo, Andrea Roventini, and Tim J Foxon. Uncertainty of climate policies and
implications for economics and finance: An evolutionary economics approach. Ecological
Economics , 163:177–182, 2019.
[15] Karen O’Brien. Is the 1.5 c target possible? exploring the three spheres of transformation.
Current opinion in environmental sustainability , 31:153–160, 2018.
[16] J. Ross Quinlan. Induction of decision trees. Machine learning , 1:81–106, 1986.
[17] Joeri Rogelj, Michel Den Elzen, Niklas Höhne, Taryn Fransen, Hanna Fekete, Harald Winkler,
Roberto Schaeffer, Fu Sha, Keywan Riahi, and Malte Meinshausen. Paris agreement climate
proposals need a boost to keep warming well below 2 c. Nature , 534(7609):631–639, 2016.
5[18] Georgios Savvidis, Kais Siala, Christoph Weissbart, Lukas Schmidt, Frieder Borggrefe, Subhash
Kumar, Karen Pittel, Reinhard Madlener, and Kai Hufendiek. The gap between energy policy
challenges and model capabilities. Energy Policy , 125:503–520, 2019.
[19] S Serban Scrieciu. The inherent dangers of using computable general equilibrium models as a
single integrated modelling framework for sustainability impact assessment. a critical note on
böhringer and löschel (2006). Ecological Economics , 60(4):678–684, 2007.
[20] Leonard A Smith and Nicholas Stern. Uncertainty in science and its role in climate policy.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences , 369(1956):4818–4841, 2011.
[21] Ioannis Tsiropoulos, Wouter Nijs, Dalius Tarvydas, P Ruiz, et al. Towards net-zero emissions
in the eu energy system by 2050. Insights from Scenarios in Line with the , 2030, 2020.
[22] Thomas Weber, Nicola A Wiseman, and Annette Kock. Global ocean methane emissions
dominated by shallow coastal waters. Nature communications , 10(1):4584, 2019.
[23] Sabine Weiland, Thomas Hickmann, Markus Lederer, Jens Marquardt, and Sandra Schwinden-
hammer. The 2030 agenda for sustainable development: transformative change through the
sustainable development goals? Politics and Governance , 9(1):90–95, 2021.
[24] Ian Sue Wing. Computable general equilibrium models and their use in economy-wide policy
analysis. Technical Note, Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, MIT ,
2004.
[25] Federica Zennaro, Elisa Furlan, Christian Simeoni, Silvia Torresan, Sinem Aslan, Andrea
Critto, and Antonio Marcomini. Exploring machine learning potential for climate change risk
assessment. Earth-Science Reviews , 220:103752, 2021.
[26] Fan Zhai. Armington meets melitz: Introducing firm heterogeneity in a global cge model of
trade. Journal of Economic Integration , pages 575–604, 2008.
[27] Ruda Zhang, Patrick Wingo, Rodrigo Duran, Kelly Rose, Jennifer Bauer, and Roger Ghanem.
Environmental economics and uncertainty: Review and a machine learning outlook. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.11780 , 2020.
[28] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image
translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , pages 2223–2232, 2017.
6A Detailed CMEE Data Information
The Carbon Monitor Energy-Emission (CMEE) Time Series Dataset integrates daily CO 2emission
data and daily power generation data from the Carbon Monitor project. Using country and date as
common attributes, we merged these datasets to create a structure suitable for machine learning tasks.
A.1 Dataset Composition
The dataset comprises three primary numerical components:
•Proportion ( p): This vector represents the proportions of 8 different energy sources and 6
sectoral emissions, giving insight into the energy mix and the sources of emissions.
•Total Energy ( En): This indicates the total daily power generation for each country in units
of GWh/ day, providing a measure of energy output.
•Total Emission ( Em): This represents the total daily CO 2emissions in units of Mt/ day,
capturing the carbon footprint associated with the energy produced and consumed.
Additionally, the dataset includes categorical columns for the country and date, totalling 18 columns.
Each row captures the daily emission and energy data for a specific country on a particular day. The
CMEE dataset spans 12 countries, each with data from January 1, 2019, to June 30, 2024, resulting
in 2,008 days and a total of 24,096 data entries.
Figure 3: Interactive visualization of aggregated daily emission and power generation data for various
countries in the CMEE dataset. The current display shows China’s energy mix and sectoral emission
structure, highlighting a high reliance on coal and significant industrial emissions. This visualization
allows exploration of different countries’ data, available at https://public.tableau.com/app/
profile/unknow404/viz/CMEE_Five_Normal_Dashboard/Dashboard1 .
7A.2 Data Visualization and Analysis
Figure 3 provides an interactive visualization of aggregated daily emissions and power generation
data for various countries. The current display focuses on China’s energy mix and sectoral emissions,
revealing a high reliance on coal and a significant industrial sector. This pattern underscores the
challenges China faces in transitioning to a low-carbon economy.
However, the raw data contains considerable noise, particularly in the emission data, which can hinder
the model’s ability to learn generalizable patterns. To address this, we applied Gaussian filtering to
smooth the data. The following figures illustrate the time series before and after smoothing:
(a) Comparison of emission time series before and after smoothing. The solid lines represent the original data,
while the dashed lines show the smoothed data.
(b) Comparison of energy time series before and after smoothing. The solid lines represent the original data,
while the dashed lines show the smoothed data.
Figure 4: Smoothing the data using Gaussian filtering reduces noise, enhancing the machine learning
model’s ability to capture underlying trends and patterns without being distracted by random fluctua-
tions.
8A.3 Correlation Analysis
Figure 5: Correlation matrix of various energy sources and sectoral emissions, illustrating the
relationships between different types of energy production and their associated emissions. High
correlations between certain energy types, such as coal and total emissions, indicate significant
impacts on CO 2levels.
The correlation matrix in Figure 5 shows the relationships between various energy sources and
emissions. High correlations between certain energy types, such as coal and total emissions, suggest
that changes in coal usage significantly impact CO 2emissions. Understanding these correlations
helps in designing policies that target specific energy transitions to achieve emission reduction goals
effectively.
By cleaning and structuring this data, we create a robust foundation for developing and applying
machine learning models to predict energy demand and emissions, enabling more informed climate
policy-making decisions.
9B Model Selection & CLEAN Design
Traditional machine learning models like Linear Regression, K-nearest Neighbors (KNN), Decision
Trees, and XGBoost are effective for discrete data but struggle with capturing continuous patterns
necessary for regression tasks. Linear models can handle continuous data but are limited by their
linear assumptions, making them inadequate for capturing non-linear relationships. Our deep learning-
based model, the Cycle Learning Energy-Emission Assessment Network (CLEAN), addresses these
limitations by offering three main advantages. Capturing Non-linear Relationships : Neural
networks like Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) are capable of modellinging complex, non-linear
relationships. Learning Continuous Features : Unlike tree-based models, neural networks can
effectively learn from continuous data, making them more suitable for regression. Flexibility in
Model Design : The CLEAN model’s architecture allows for end-to-end learning with two encoders
(MLP or CNN), each designed for specific tasks—Energy-to-Emission and Emission-to-Energy
mapping. Inspired by CycleGAN, we use a Cycle loss function to reinforce learning between these
tasks, enhancing model robustness, illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6: The CLEAN model architecture with two encoders for Energy-to-Emission and Emission-
to-Energy mappings. The Cycle loss ensures consistent feature spaces, enhancing performance and
generalization.
The Cycle loss in the CLEAN model acts as a regularization term, promoting consistency between
the Energy-to-Emission and Emission-to-Energy feature spaces, thus improving generalization. The
mathematical formulation for the Cycle loss is:
Lcycle=LEn→Em+LEm→En+λ(LEm→En→Em+LEn→Em→En)
Where LEn→EmandLEm→Enis the standard prediction losses using mean square error from
predicting emissions based on energy inputs, and from predicting energy based on emissions inputs.
Regularised term LEm→En→EmandLEn→Em→Enensures that when predicting emissions, the
subsequent prediction of energy based on those emissions returns to the original energy input, and
mapping back. λis a hyperparameter that controls the weight of the cycle consistency loss, balancing
it with the standard prediction losses.
10C Densify Augmentation
We propose a novel data generation method called Densify to address the inherent sparsity issues in
tabular data. In our context, the CMEE dataset provides energy and industrial structure data for 12
different countries. However, each country is an independent and heterogeneous entity with significant
differences from one another, leading to what we define as data sparsity. Learning continuous and
dense features from such highly sparse data is challenging. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) rely
heavily on a continuous and dense sample space, which is why they perform well in modalities like
NLP and computer vision (CV), where training datasets (such as text and images) are typically large
and dense. In contrast, DNNs often underperform on tabular data because training on sparse datasets
can easily result in overfitting.
To mitigate this issue, we introduce the Densify method. This approach involves randomly sampling
mcountries from the existing dataset and assigning each country a sample weight λi∼ U(0,1), with
the constraint that the sum of all weights equals one, i.e.,Pm
i=1λi= 1. The augmented or "synced"
country data, csynced , is then generated as:
csynced =mX
i=1λi·ci,where ci∈C. (1)
Here, cirepresents a sample from the existing country dataset C. This data augmentation technique
helps create a more continuous and dense feature space, allowing deep neural networks to learn more
effectively from tabular data. Below is the pseudo-code of the Densify method:
Algorithm 1 Densify Pseudo-code
Input: n ▷ Number of synced countries to generate
Input: m ▷ Number of countries to sample per synced country
Input: C ▷ Set of existing countries’ data
fori= 1tondo
Cs={c1,c2, . . . , cm} ▷Sample mcountries from C
λ={λ1, λ2, . . . , λ m} ∼ U (0,1) ▷Generate weights such thatPm
j=1λj= 1
csynced =Pm
j=1λj·cj ▷Compute synced country data
Store csynced
end for
Output: Synced country data csynced forNcountries
We plot the emission time series of five normal countries from CMEE data and compare them with
synced data shown in Figure 7:
11(a) Emission time series of five normal countries from CMEE data.
(b) Emission time series of the synced countries after data augmentation using the Densify method. Here, m
is set to 5, indicating that each synced country is generated by randomly sampling and weighting five original
countries. This augmentation introduces more diverse patterns into the original CMEE data, enabling the model
to learn a denser and more continuous feature space.
Figure 7: Comparison of carbon emission time series for five normal countries and their synthesized
counterparts.
12