Extracting a Database of Challenges and Mitigation
Strategies for Sodium-ion Battery Development
Mrigi Munjal1,*, Thorben Prein2,*, Vineeth Venugopal1, Kevin J. Huang1, Elsa Olivetti1
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology,2Technische Universität München
t.prein@tum.de , {mrigi ,vineethv ,kjhuang ,elsao }@mit.edu
*Equal contribution
Abstract
Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have been gaining attention for applications like grid-
scale energy storage, largely owing to the abundance of sodium and an expected
favorable $ kWh-1figure. SIBs can leverage the well-established manufacturing
knowledge of Lithium-ion Batteries (LIBs), but several materials synthesis and
performance challenges for electrode materials need to be addressed. This work
extracts a large database of challenges restricting the performance and synthesis
of SIB cathode active materials (CAMs) and pairs them with corresponding mit-
igation strategies from the SIB literature by employing custom natural language
processing (NLP) tools. The derived insights enable scientists in research and
industry to navigate a large number of proposed strategies and focus on impactful
scalability-informed mitigation strategies to accelerate the transition from lab to
commercialization.
Figure 1: NLP Pipeline : We implemented a sequential filtering and visualization pipeline, employing
sentence classification [ 1], phrase-level classification, and relationship extraction [ 2,3]. The outcomes
are visually represented through BERT-based topic modeling [ 4] in Figure 3 and knowledge graphs
in Figure 5.
1 Introduction
Clean energy transition is crucial to mitigating climate change [ 5]. Energy storage devices, particularly
compact chemical energy formats like batteries, are essential for managing the intermittent nature of
renewable sources like solar and wind energy [ 6]. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are the most common
of all batteries today since they offer the highest energy density and output voltage compared to
alternatives [ 7]. However, concerns have been raised regarding the skewed geographic impact of
lithium extraction and the price impact of rapid growth [ 8]. The development of alternative battery
chemistries, such as those based on sodium, could offer diversification opportunities [ 9,10,11].
Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) can be good replacements for LIBs for grid storage. While SIB fabrication
can parallel that of LIBs in terms of cell manufacturing and assembly [ 12,13], the commercialization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).of SIBs is lagging behind. This limitation predominantly stems from the performance and synthesis
routes of cathode active materials for SIBs [14, 15].
Keeping track of developments can be complex as insights across material types are buried in an
enormous corpus of >10,000 publications [ 16]. Therefore, it is vital to offer a coherent overview and
an ability to efficiently query for researchers to develop these batteries.
NLP-based studies in materials science in the last few years have focused on the extraction of
quantitative synthesis related data and materials properties, enabling training of regressors for
property related models [ 17,18,19,20]. In contrast to these studies that often omit the authors’
rationale and compel researchers to depend on model-generated interpretations of the data, our
methodology focuses on capturing author rationale regarding cause-effect relationships for challenges.
These are then aligned with the relevant mitigation strategies. This approach maintains a high degree
of adaptability in the array of suggested solutions. We believe that the intentional focus of our method
on textual references to materials engineering methods and mechanisms, rather than on quantitative
data can enhance the understanding of existing approaches. Our primary contributions are as follows:
• Detailed database on SIBs materials challenges and mitigation strategies
•Interactive search tool for scientists to find SIB-related mitigation strategies and linked
mechanistic causes corresponding to observed performance characteristics
•Classifiers and training data for efficient battery literature screening, extendable to lithium-
ion battery research
Our novel approach utilizes a systematic extraction of challenges and mitigation strategies from the
literature using a two-stage process that increases the accuracy and relevance of the information
gathered. Moreover, this specialized focus on SIBs, which are a critical and emerging area in battery
technology, fills a specific knowledge gap in the field. The interactive search tool not only aids in
research but also in practical problem-solving, allowing for a more dynamic and user-friendly way to
access complex information. Our methodology not only enhances the efficiency of literature review
but also provides a scalable model that can be adapted to other areas of battery research.
2 Methods and Framework
Figure 2: Senetence, Phrase and Relationship Extraction: The Sentence classification tag of this
example sentence is "Mitigation". The phrases and relationships between phrases are identified in
this annotated example.
In recent years, there has been a significant surge in published research papers on SIBs to the order of
104[16]. It would take over 20,000 uninterrupted hours to manually read and comprehend every single
paper, assuming an average of two hours per paper. However, our pipeline can efficiently process
the entire corpus of scientific literature in just 6 hours, without requiring active human intervention.
Recently, several fields have been trying to use visual maps to organize and analyze topics in text
[21]. Our methodology drew inspiration from seminal works in sentence-oriented sentiment analysis
[22,23,24], sentence-based search mechanisms [ 1,25], open information extraction [ 3,2], and topic
modeling [ 4]. However, to the best of our knowledge, application of this scale of processing has not
been developed for battery literature.
We extracted a structured database, which enables us to identify prominent topics from an extensive
breadth of topics and infer generalizable implications about scalability-informed lab research. The
relevant papers were downloaded using a custom download pipeline developed by the group [ 18]. We
organized extracted information for 18 cathode material types across layered metal oxides, Prussian
2Figure 3: Exploratory view of extracted mitigation sentences (a) Visualized space of embeddings
of mitigation strategy phrases. Marked regions showcase various mitigation strategy topics (b)
Visualized space of embeddings of challenges. Marked regions showcase various micro-challenges.
The candidate material here is Sodium Iron Manganese Oxide.
blue analogs, and polyanionics. Our framework allows for enhanced accessibility for non-experts
in the domain and interpolating scalability strategies across material types. Figure 1 illustrates the
NLP pipeline tasks. Our adaptable pipeline can be used for several similar tasks. Our sentence
classification, phrase classification and relationship extraction methodology is described below.
Sentence Classification: Our sentences of interest are defined as:
•Challenge Sentences encapsulate discussions about all performance or materials-related flaws,
their mechanistic origins, and shortcomings in synthesis procedures. (e.g., " Irreversible sodium
loss in sodium-ion batteries results in low specific capacity. ")
•Mitigation Sentences involve references to enhancing the material’s key performance indices or
associated properties and methods. (e.g. in Figure 2)
Phrase Classification and Relationship Extraction: To extract relevant context spans from the
sentences, we developed a phrase-level classification scheme. We assessed challenges at two scales
for phrase-level classification: macro-challenges and micro-challenges. Macro-challenges are key
performance challenges directly linked to resultant performance like " low specific capacity ," "poor
rate capability .", etc. Whereas, micro-challenges are mechanistic causes of these macro-challenges
that indicate the underlying phenomena that contribute to macro-challenges like " low redox activity ",
"irreversible Na loss ," etc. Besides these two types of challenges, we extracted phrases related
to mitigation strategies (e.g., " addition of sacrificial salts "). We also extracted the relationship
among those phrases. Figure 3 visualizes the mitigation strategies space for NFMO (Sodium Iron
Manganese Oxide) clustered using phrases. Extracted challenges and mitigation strategies were can
be to constitute challenge-mitigation pairs.
Model Evaluation: For the development of our sentence and phrase classifiers, we benchmarked
with a variety of approaches on our dataset, using stratified data splits and hyperparameter optimiza-
tion. As seen in Table 1, the performance of BERT-based models [ 26] was commendable. The best
results were attained with SciBERT [ 27] and MatSciBERT [ 28], which were both pretrained in the
domain of scientific publications. We also discovered that recent autoregressive Large Language
Models (LLMs), such as GPT-3 [ 29], yielded promising results, even when only presented with 10
in-context examples [ 29]. We utilized a widely employed model, namely, the Dynamic Graph Based
Information Extraction (DyGIE) for phrase and relationship extraction [3].
Our approach enabled us to create a comprehensive database of materials-specific challenges and
their mechanistic sources that impact material performance, along with corresponding mitigation
strategies. This valuable overview allows us to scrutinize lab-probed strategies and hone in on
compelling candidates for further analysis. In total, we obtained a database of approximately 31,000
challenge and mitigation sentences. Out of these, our classifiers identified 9,000 relations. Analyzing
the diversity of papers in the final relational database, we note that 91% of the initial papers are
3F1 P R
MATSCIBERT 83.1 (1.2) 83.4 (1.1) 83.8 (1.3)
SCIBERT 84.1 (1.7) 84.4 (1.5) 84.2 (1.4)
GPT3 @10 SHOTS 73.2 75.9 72.5
Sentences Phrases Relations
CHALLENGE 84.1 67.5 39.4
MITIGATION 83.1 67.9 50.8
Table 1: (a) Model comparison on the sentence classification task for challenge sentences; (b) F1
scores for sentence classification, phrase classification and relationship extraction
represented in the mitigation sentences database and 84% in the challenge sentences database,
underscoring the comprehensive coverage of our source material. Domain experts evaluated the
informativeness and correctness of the extracted relationships which yielded a correctness score of
85%. The database can be queried for a large variety of challenge-mitigation pairs using challenge
topics to aid in expediting the development of commercial-scale sodium-ion batteries.
3 Results and Discussion
Figure 4: Sodium-ion Battery Builder GPT Snapshot of our chatbot to interact with our database
using OpenAI custom GPTs. The chatbot can be queries to understand underlying mechanistic causes
of challenges encountered in battery development as well as strategies to address them from reliable
sources.
Our NLP pipeline enables a broader understanding of SIBs. Traditional literature reviews often
depend on specialized review articles or focus on particular materials or methods, limiting the
scope of research insights. Conducting effective searches typically necessitates familiarity with
domain-specific terminology, such as types of materials, key performance indicators, current research
challenges, and techniques for processing and analysis. While the initial training of our machine
learning models involved domain experts for data labeling, the use of the pipeline does not necessitate
prior knowledge in the field. This strategy helps in mitigating biases associated with the selection of
work and topics. Our models have also shown effective adaptability to related fields like LIB data
without the need for further expert input. Furthermore, this method promotes diversity in the database
by encompassing a wider range of research works, reducing the risk of overlooking significant studies
due to narrow search criteria or unconscious biases.
Our extracted databases were integrated with ChatGPT’s custom GPT builder [ 30] to create a Sodium-
ion Battery Builder chatbot (Figure 4) that can be queried to find relevant mitigation strategies
for a given macro- or micro-challenge. The chatbot can also handle queries for retrieving linked
micro-challenges for a given macro-challenge. The chatbot is designed to provide the user with the
DOI that is linked to retrieved scientific information to increase reliability and minimize hallucination.
Incorporating entire research papers to construct a specialized GPT for battery development is
impractical, given the vast quantity and extensive size of these documents, which exceed the context
4window limitations of generative models. Conversely, our database adopts a selective approach,
concentrating exclusively on segments of the literature that address specific challenges and their
respective mitigation strategies in battery technology. This targeted filtration enables efficient querying
for this Retrieval Augmented Generation chatbot.
We clustered our mitigation database (Figure 3) using sentence BERT [ 31] computed embeddings of
the strategies, revealing a holistic map of the diverse mitigation strategies space. We also created
knowledge graphs as shown in Figure 5 to identify "challenge-mitigation pairs" of interest.
Figure 5: Knowledge-graph representation of some mitigation strategies linked to the macro-
challenges of ’Rate Capability’ and ’Cycling Stability’ which are the two most commonly reported
macro-challenges. These graphs were constructed by utilizing our relationship extractor to get
"challenge-mitigation pairs". (a.1) and (a.2) are for NaFeMnO type materials, (b) is for NaNiMnO
type materials and (c) is for NaNiMnCoO type materials.
4 Limitations and Future Outlook
Sodium-ion batteries are a promising energy storage option due to abundant and affordable sodium.
Utilizing NLP, we extract crucial data to aid in the development of SIBs. Our framework propels
efficient SIB exploration by pulling information from a large corpus. NLP has the potential to steer
future research toward fruitful avenues, bringing us closer to realizing the full potential of commercial
SIBs. However, transitioning from identifying ’challenge-mitigation’ patterns to selecting the optimal
strategy remains a complex task necessitating human expertise. This NLP framework allows us to
select case studies of importance that can be evaluated further with a technoeconomic lens for a
scalability analysis coupled with extracted performance metrics.
5 Data Availability
The extracted database and classifiers are available at github.com/olivettigroup/NLP4SIB.
Sodium Ion Battery Builder GPT built on OpenAI’s ChatGPT platform as a custom GPT is available
here: chat.openai.com/g/g-2gOTffBeL-sodium-ion-battery-builder
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
The authors thank the support from our sponsors, Shell USA and Dr Ryan Stephens (Team Lead,
Energy Storage at Shell, USA. This work is also supported by the National Science Foundation
DMREF Awards 1922090, 1922311, 1922372, the National Science Foundation FMRG award, and
the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under contract N00014-20-1-2280.
5References
[1]Dan Lahav, Jon Saad Falcon, Bailey Kuehl, Sophie Johnson, Sravanthi Parasa, Noam Shomron, Duen Horng
Chau, Diyi Yang, Eric Horvitz, Daniel S Weld, et al. A search engine for discovery of scientific challenges
and directions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pages
11982–11990, 2022.
[2]Zexuan Zhong and Danqi Chen. A frustratingly easy approach for entity and relation extraction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.12812 , 2020.
[3]David Wadden, Ulme Wennberg, Yi Luan, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Entity, relation, and event extraction
with contextualized span representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03546 , 2019.
[4]Nicole Peinelt, Dong Nguyen, and Maria Liakata. tbert: Topic models and bert joining forces for semantic
similarity detection. In Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics , pages 7047–7055, 2020.
[5] IPCC. Summary for policymakers , pages 7–22. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2007.
[6]John B. Goodenough and Youngsik Kim. Challenges for rechargeable li batteries. Chemistry of Materials ,
22(3):587–603, 2010.
[7]Verónica Palomares, Paula Serras, Irune Villaluenga, Karina B. Hueso, Javier Carretero-González, and
Teófilo Rojo. Na-ion batteries, recent advances and present challenges to become low cost energy storage
systems. Energy Environ. Sci.
[8]Peter Greim, A. A. Solomon, and Christian Breyer. Assessment of lithium criticality in the global energy
transition and addressing policy gaps in transportation. Nature Communications , 11(1):4570, Sep 2020.
[9]Shyue Ping Ong, Vincent L. Chevrier, Geoffroy Hautier, Anubhav Jain, Charles Moore, Sangtae Kim,
Xiaohua Ma, and Gerbrand Ceder. V oltage, stability and diffusion barrier differences between sodium-ion
and lithium-ion intercalation materials. Energy Environ. Sci. , 4:3680–3688, 2011.
[10] Naoaki Yabuuchi, Kei Kubota, Mouad Dahbi, and Shinichi Komaba. Research development on sodium-ion
batteries. Chemical Reviews , 114(23):11636–11682, 2014. PMID: 25390643.
[11] Partha Saha, Moni Kanchan Datta, Oleg I. Velikokhatnyi, Ayyakkannu Manivannan, David Alman, and
Prashant N. Kumta. Rechargeable magnesium battery: Current status and key challenges for the future.
Progress in Materials Science , 66:1–86, 2014.
[12] Lina Zhao, Teng Zhang, Wei Li, Tao Li, Long Zhang, Xiaoguang Zhang, and Zhiyi Wang. Engineering of
sodium-ion batteries: Opportunities and challenges. Engineering , 2021.
[13] Nuria Tapia-Ruiz, A Robert Armstrong, Hande Alptekin, Marco A Amores, Heather Au, Jerry Barker,
Rebecca Boston, William R Brant, Jake M Brittain, Yue Chen, et al. 2021 roadmap for sodium-ion batteries.
Journal of Physics: Energy , 3(3):031503, 2021.
[14] Robert Usiskin, Yaxiang Lu, Jelena Popovic, Markas Law, Palani Balaya, Yong-Sheng Hu, and Joachim
Maier. Fundamentals, status and promise of sodium-based batteries. Nature Reviews Materials , 6(11):1020–
1035, June 2021.
[15] Jang-Yeon Hwang, Seung-Taek Myung, and Yang-Kook Sun. Sodium-ion batteries: present and future.
Chemical Society Reviews , 46:3529–3614, 2017.
[16] The lens - free & open patent and scholarly search. https://www.lens.org/.
[17] Olga Kononova, Haoyan Huo, Tanjin He, Ziqin Rong, Tiago Botari, Wenhao Sun, Vahe Tshitoyan, and
Gerbrand Ceder. Text-mined dataset of inorganic materials synthesis recipes. Scientific data , 6(1):203,
2019.
[18] Edward Kim, Kevin Huang, Adam Saunders, Andrew McCallum, Gerbrand Ceder, and Elsa Olivetti.
Materials synthesis insights from scientific literature via text extraction and machine learning. Chemistry
of Materials , 29(21):9436–9444, 2017.
[19] Christopher Karpovich, Elton Pan, Zach Jensen, and Elsa Olivetti. Interpretable machine learning enabled
inorganic reaction classification and synthesis condition prediction. Chemistry of Materials , 35(3):1062–
1079, 2023.
6[20] Thorben Prein, Elton Pan, Tom Doerr, Elsa Olivetti, and Jennifer Rupp. Mtencoder: A multi-task pretrained
transformer encoder for materials representation learning. In AI for Accelerated Materials Design-NeurIPS
2023 Workshop , 2023.
[21] R. Maskat, S. M. Shaharudin, Deden Witarsyah, and H. Mahdin. A survey on forms of visualization and
tools used in topic modelling. Journal of Information and Visualization , 7(2), 2023.
[22] Manish Munikar, Sushil Shakya, and Aakash Shrestha. Fine-grained sentiment classification using bert. In
2019 Artificial Intelligence for Transforming Business and Society (AITB) , volume 1, pages 1–5. IEEE,
2019.
[23] Zabit Hameed and Begonya Garcia-Zapirain. Sentiment classification using a single-layered bilstm model.
Ieee Access , 8:73992–74001, 2020.
[24] Andrea Chiorrini, Claudia Diamantini, Alex Mircoli, and Domenico Potena. Emotion and sentiment
analysis of tweets using bert. In EDBT/ICDT Workshops , volume 3, 2021.
[25] Johannes Daxenberger, Benjamin Schiller, Chris Stahlhut, Erik Kaiser, and Iryna Gurevych. Argumentext:
argument classification and clustering in a generalized search scenario. Datenbank-Spektrum , 20:115–121,
2020.
[26] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
[27] Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. Scibert: A pretrained language model for scientific text. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1903.10676 , 2019.
[28] Tanishq Gupta, Mohd Zaki, NM Anoop Krishnan, and Mausam. Matscibert: A materials domain language
model for text mining and information extraction. npj Computational Materials , 8(1):102, 2022.
[29] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[30] Natalie. Creating a gpt. https://help.openai.com/en/articles/8554397-creating-a-gpt ,
2023. Accessed: [insert date here].
[31] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084 , 2019.
[32] Cohere api. Retrieved from [cohere.com] , [2023]. Accessed 1.3.2023.
[33] Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection
for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 , 2018.
7A Appendix
A.1 Methods: Automated Literature Extraction
A.1.1 Corpus
A comprehensive corpus spanning the SIB-literature was assembled by querying the Lens API [ 16] using
relevant keywords. The acquisition of the papers was made possible through licensing agreements with multiple
publishers. Subsequent subdivision into paragraphs was carried out leveraging the group’s prior work [ 18]. This
initial corpus was then filtered for cathode materials of interest using several text-based matching rules.
A.1.2 Classifiers
Our pipeline harnessed sentence and phrase-level classifiers to screen and filter papers for pertinent information
and underscore key mechanisms as cited by the authors. It embodied two types of classification models:
Sentence Level The initial filtering stage operates at the sentence level where we utilized fine-tuned BERT
models to discriminate among three sentence categories: challenge sentences, mitigation sentences, and sentences
of neither class. This methodology proved effective in efficiently screening the millions of sentences present in
our corpus, subsequently filtering out information of distinct value. Given a sentence si, our classifier predicted
the probability distribution over the classes ci, eventually assigning the most suitable label. Our three classes
were defined as Challenge Sentences, Mitigation Sentences and Non-Target Sentences..
For the development of our sentence-level screening classifier, we annotated a dataset comprising approximately
2,500 sentences. To expedite the labeling endeavor while securing sufficient quantities of infrequently occurring
improvement and challenge sentences, we exploited an in-context learned GPT-esque large-language model
for a cycle of weak labeling [ 32]. Ultimately, selected weak-labeled sentences were supplemented by an equal
number of randomly chosen sentences and presented to human annotators, thus assuring expert-level quality.
Owing to the presence of highly domain-specific vocabulary, we employed the expertise of battery domain
experts for labeling. The main merit of this procedure lies in the cutting of labeling time by augmenting the
proportion of scarce challenge and improvement sentences. Moreover, this methodology ensures the inclusion of
hard-to-predict sentences that had been incorrectly selected by the weak labeller. Overall sentence diversity is
ensured by overcoming potential biases of the weak-labeller by introducing a substantial volume of randomly
sampled sentences. We computed the inter-annotator rating to be high with agreements of 80% Cohen’s κamong
the trio of annotators.
For the development of our classifiers, we commenced by benchmarking a variety of approaches on our dataset,
using stratified data splits and hyperparameter optimisation.
Phrase Level The phrases were categorized as mitigation strategies (e.g., "doping with Li"), undesirable
material-related outcomes (e.g., "low Mn dissolution"), or performance metrics (e.g., "energy density"). Formally,
our task was: given a set of all candidate spans si, assign each span to the correct entry in the set of defined
entity classes Eusing ye(si)∈ E. This set of classes encompassed valid and invalid phrases. In the second
stage the same spans are then investigated for causal relationships, scrutinizing all potential combinations using
yr(si, sj)∈ R.
To assemble a dataset for our task, we curated annotation guidelines and utilize our sentence classifiers to
evaluate the sodium-ion battery corpus. We randomly sampled 600sentences and around 2,000phrases, with
equal shares of challenge and improvement types for expert annotation. Comparing the inter-annotator agreement
scores amongst a subset of 60sentences, we calculated the average inter-annotator agreement by F1 scores for
pairwise comparison. Our examination revealed that the discrepancy is primarily caused by the high complexity
leading to divergences in annotators’ span delimitation. We found the annotations to remain accurate and
preserved the key messages conveyed by the sentences in our dataset. This underscored the high degree of
flexibility inherent in our task.
The comparison of inter-annotator agreement and classifier performance demonstrated the outstanding level of
capability attained by our model. It effectively exploited sentence context to discern lengthy phrases within the
sentences, providing insights into mitigation strategies as well as challenges. Our model successfully discerns
even non-trivial relationships.
A.1.3 Database Creation and Accessibility
The core of our methodology was formed by a sequential application of the developed methods. The extraction
and presentation of information were facilitated through four main steps. Initially, the acquired publications were
scrutinized for the studied cathode active material discussed, which includes layered metal oxides, polyanionic
compounds, and Prussian blue analogues. We utilized text-guided rules to match elemental formulas and
8Figure 6: Challenge sentences space extracted using our NLP framework from the sodium-ion
batteries literature on NFMO (sodium iron manganese oxide) cathodes with labelled approximate
regions of prominent micro-challenges.
F1 P R
MATSCIBERT 83.1 (1.2) 83.4 (1.1) 83.8 (1.3)
SCIBERT 84.1 (1.7) 84.4 (1.5) 84.2 (1.4)
SENTENCE BERT 79.2 (1.8) 79.3 (2.0) 79.2 (1.8)
GPT3 @10 SHOTS 73.2 75.9 72.5
TF-IDF 70.2 70.1 70.5
RANDOM 51.4 51.2 51.8
Sentences Entities Relations
CHALLENGE 84.1 67.5 39.4
IMPROVEMENT 83.1 67.9 50.8
Table 2: Model Comparison on the Sentence Dataset (Left) and Results for the Open Information
Extraction Task (Right).
delineate materials by composition. Subsequently, the papers were introduced to our sentence classifier to
discern sentences related to challenges and mitigation strategies. Following this, in the phrase and relation
identification phase, we highlighted sections in the literature of particular interest. Lastly, we visualized the
database of identified challenges and mitigation strategies by encoding each sentence using sentence BERT
models [31, 4].
By applying this methodology to our corpus of approximately 2200 papers on selected cathode chemistries, we
obtained a database of 31,000 challenge and mitigation sentences. Out of these, our classifiers identified 9,000
relations. Analyzing the diversity of papers in the final relational database, we noted that 91% of the papers
are represented in the final improvement, and 82% in the challenge database, underscoring the comprehensive
coverage of our source material. To evaluate the accuracy of our database, we randomly selected 200 entries,
equally distributed between challenge and mitigation strategy entries. Two domain experts then assessed these
entries for their accuracy and completeness. Our findings indicated very good overall correctness exceeding 90%
in our database. Enabling usage of our data for further analysis.
To categorize the identified mitigation and challenge mentions, we utilized BERT-based clustering methods
to visualize the extracted phenomena. We collated a dataset of 1100 root causes related to materials, which
led to key performance degradation. These root cause or "mirco-challenges" were carried and of several types:
elemental phenomena (e.g., electronic conductivity), structural phenomena (e.g., secondary phase formation),
morphological phenomena (e.g., surface impurities), and key performance metrics (e.g., energy density).
Subsequently, we assessed various clustering methods based on their cluster purity, which evaluated the model’s
ability to group text mentions of related phenomena closely together, modeling topics of interest. The most
successful results were attained when phrases were embedded using Sentence-BERT models [ 31], which yielded
9the highest cluster purity values. We thus incorporated this approach into our methodology and introduced an
additional visualization step. Utilizing the UMAP [ 33] algorithm, we condensed the dimensionality into 2D
space, generating an interactive map of the curated database. Here, relevant strategies were grouped together,
providing a conducive platform for comprehensive exploration of pairs of challenges and mitigation strategies. It
further facilitated their selection for evaluation of large-scale manufacturing feasibility. Beyond its application
in the realm of SIBs, our methodology was successfully transposed to the field of LIBs. Assessing database
accuracy demonstrates a tolerable reduction in performance, with the correctness of database entries dropping to
90%. This successful domain shift paves the way for us to extend the array of investigated mitigation strategies
to those strategies reported for LIBs, which have already seen industrial-scale adoption.
A.2 Case Study Identification and Evaluation
We can use our developed methodology for downstream tasks to identify and evaluate case studies and combine
it with a process-based cost modeling for scalability inspection as shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Combining NLP techniques with Process-based Cost Modeling : Extracted challenges
and mitigation strategies were mapped to constitute challenge-mitigation pairs (Arrows 1 and 2).
These challenge-mitigation pairs represent individual cases that can be further evaluated (Arrow 3).
To get a broader overview of all represented strategies, we utilized the visualized space of mitigation
strategies (Figure 3 (a)) to downselect challenge-mitigation case studies (Arrow 4) and create a
database of sentences of interest and corresponding DOIs. After the identification of the case studies
(Arrow 5), we used the extracted challenges database of sentences and corresponding DOIs (Arrow
6) along with a cost model built in-house for sodium-ion battery cathode materials (Arrow 7) to
quantitatively assess the scalability barriers. The blue parameters were obtained via NLP and the
green through cost modeling.
10