Methane SatMapper: Methane Detection from
Satellite Imagery Using Hyperspectral Transformer
Satish Kumar1
satishkumar@ucsb.eduA S M Iftekhar1
iftekhar@ucsb.eduBowen Zhang1
bowen68@ucsb.edu
Richard Sserunjogi2
sserurich@gmail.comMehan Jayasuriya3
mehan@mozillafoundation.org
1University of California Santa Barbara,2Makerere University,3Mozilla Foundation
Abstract
Methane (CH 4) plays a critical role in accelerating global climate change, and
recent advancements using Sentinel-2 satellite imagery have demonstrated potential
in detecting and quantifying significant methane emissions. However, existing
approaches often rely on temporal analysis of shortwave-infrared spectra, assuming
consistent ground conditions and prior knowledge of methane-free periods, which
can lead to errors and limit scalability. To overcome these challenges, we present
Methane SatMapper, an innovative end-to-end spectral transformer model specif-
ically designed to accurately identify and quantify methane plumes. Our model
introduces two novel modules: one that identifies potential methane emission sites
by analyzing solar radiation absorption in the spectral domain and another that
localizes and quantifies methane plumes without the need for temporal data. By
utilizing all 12 spectral channels of Sentinel-2 imagery, our architecture effectively
estimates ground terrain and detects methane emissions, providing enhanced ro-
bustness to variable ground conditions and increased computational efficiency by
eliminating the need for historical time-series data. Primary evaluations confirm
that Methane SatMapper delivers precise and reliable methane detection, addressing
key limitations in scalability and temporal dependence.
1 Introduction
The increases in atmospheric CH 4have prompted governments to enact regulations and action plans
such as the ‘U.S. Methane Emissions Reduction Action Plan’ in 2021 and the ‘Global Methane Pledge
Energy Pathway’ in 2022 to curb CH 4emission [ 2,19]. Accurately identifying and tracking the
contribution of various sources to the methane budget will be paramount to enforce these regulations.
Given the strong potential of satellite-based instruments for data collection at high-frequency (multiple
times a month) on global scales and even remote and hard-to-access regions, recent research has
depicted the potential of deploying methane emissions analysis on public, global-mapping, multi-
spectral instruments like the ESA Sentinel-2 mission [ 25,3,7,20,3]. With two polar-orbiting, sun-
synchronous satellites, the Multispectral Instrument (MSI) onboard the Sentinel-2 satellites measures
the reflected radiance from Earth in multiple bands covering various areas of the electromagnetic
spectrum [ 21]. Among these bands, band 11 ( ∼1500nm−1660nm) and band 12 ( ∼2090nm−
2290nm) are able to capture methane’s SWIR (Short Wave InfraRed) absorption features at a spatial
resolution of 20m2, leading to a large breadth of work and studies on using Sentinel-2 data to
detect and quantify methane emissions [ 25,29,11,6]. Most previous Sentinel-2-based methane
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2024.analysis approaches are based on the methane column retrieval method in [ 25]. While this method,
and variations of it [ 6] have revolutionized capabilities of detecting methane emissions with public
satellite data, the strong dependency on time-series analysis of spectral reflectance data expose the
approaches to the risky assumptions of (a) knowing when emissions did not exist and (b) temporal
albedo stability of the background. Consequently, these assumptions lead to high amounts of false
positives, especially in areas with heterogeneous, temporally deviating land cover [25, 29].
To overcome shortcomings of time-series based methane analytics methods, we propose a deeper
exploitation of signals from other non-methane-sensitive spectral bands of Sentinel-2 multi-spectral
data. We use Beer-Lambert law to model the drop in intensity of light as it passes through a
medium [ 5,25]. Building on the recent advancements in signal processing techniques and the
successful application of Machine Learning models for methane emissions analysis [ 16], we propose
a two-step methodology: (1) the generation of potential methane candidates using a Spectral Feature
Generator (SFG), and (2) the integration of SFG into a Transformer-based Convolutional Neural
Network architecture [ 4,9], as illustrated in Figure 1. Using the full spectral response captured
by Sentinel-2 instruments, we expect the SFG to support Signal to Noise separation by classifying
confusing and hard-to-detect land cover types, artifacts and temporal deviations, such as water bodies,
dark green vegetation, calcite, and white painted roofs which are never considered in methods.
2 Related Work
Over the past decade, several satellites such as GOSAT [ 28], OCO-2, and TROPOMI [ 27] have
been launched to detect and quantify greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from fossil fuel activities,
enabling continuous monitoring of carbon dioxide and methane levels. The Sentinel-5P (TROPOMI)
mission [ 27], for example, provides hyperspectral imagery in the shortwave infrared (SWIR) spectrum,
where methane ( CH4) strongly absorbs light. This satellite offers daily measurements of CH4column
mole fractions across the globe, although at a relatively low spatial resolution of 5−7km [20,23,1].
Standard retrieval algorithms estimate vertical column concentrations of atmospheric methane by
fitting a radiative transfer model to remotely sensed SWIR spectra. These algorithms typically analyze
highly resolved spectra with full-width at half-maximum ranging from 0.1 to 10 nm and involving
tens to thousands of spectral samples [ 11,3]. However, methane column concentrations can, in
principle, be retrieved with just two spectral measurements [ 25,5]: one with methane absorption
and one without. This can be achieved within a single spectral band by comparing observations of
the same scene with and without a methane plume, or by using two adjacent spectral bands that
differ in their methane absorption properties but are close enough to have similar surface and aerosol
reflectance properties. Techniques like these have previously been employed to retrieve methane
column concentrations using ground-based [ 10] and airborne [ 18,22] remote sensing instruments.
But these methods are highly prone to false positives due to assumptions mentioned earlier.
The Sentinel-2 mission, although not specifically designed for methane detection, provides persistent
multi-spectral imagery in the SWIR range with a revisit time of two to ten days. By leveraging
its bands that are sensitive to methane, it is possible to detect and quantify large CH4emissions.
In this context, our proposed SatelliteMapper advances methane plume detection by integrating
both spectral and spatial correlations, providing a more robust and accurate delineation of CH4
plumes. SatelliteMapper’s approach effectively mitigates the issues of false positives and enhances
the reliability of methane detection in complex environments, addressing the limitations of previous
methods while utilizing the strengths of advanced spectral analysis techniques.
3 Methane SatMapper Architecture
The proposed approach is a transformer [ 26,12,15] based neural network architecture with a SFG
guidance. The input to the network is B1-B12 bands from Sentinel-2 Level 1C data [ 21]. The output
is a segmentation mask that is used with a radiative transfer model for methane emissions analysis.
The overall architecture (Figure 1) presents 2 feature extraction blocks (ResNet [ 8,14,13]) as shown
in Figure 1, that will extract useful features from the input, the RGB channels of the image and a
stack of B1-B12 bands from Sentinel-2 Level 1C data [ 21]. While the singled-out RGB image will
provide information about land cover (e.g. Urban areas), the full B1-B12 stack provides additional
land cover feature extraction (e.g. water bodies) while also capturing information about methane
2Figure 1: Overview of Methane SatelliteMapper (MSM) architecture. Given a multispectral image,
our RGB (B1, B2, B3) is passed to Feature Extractor. Parallely, all channels (B1-B12) of the
multispectral input as passed to Spectral Feature Generator (SFG). The SFG module generates
methane candidates features. Next these candidates are sent to Query Refiner (QR) to refine queries.
Then these queries are decoded using encoded feature from Transformer Encoder. Finally, each
decoded query is used to predict a plume mask via Mask Prediction and, bounding box and class via
FFNs (Feed Forward Network)
presence. Extracted features will be projected in a common subspace via a MLP [ 24] and passed
on to the transformer encoder network along with positional information of each pixel in the image
as shown in Figure 1. The output attention map [ 26,17] from the transformer encoder along with
project features are passed onto the transformer decoder. The decoder network uses SFG to generate
a query of the potential methane emission sites.
3.1 Spectral Feature Generator (SFG)
The SFG is designed to generator potential methane candidates. These candidates are generated using
the Beer-Lambert model.
Beer-Lambert (Channel Ratio) : We use a simple absorption model to characterize the attenuation
due to the presence of methane. The Beer-Lambert law states that for a light source with intensity I0
and a wavelength λ.
I=I0e−ΣN
i=0Ai(λ)li(1)
where the light goes through Ngases defined by their absorption Ai(λ)and equivalent optical path
length lidefined as the product of the actual optical path and the concentration of the ithgas. In our
case, the Ngases correspond to the atmosphere and I0is the sunlight in the SWIR spectrum. We can
also reasonably assume I0to be constant for all wavelengths λin each band respectively. Taking into
account that the sensor of a satellite integrates over a band of wavelengths described by a sensitivity
function s, the intensity of the light seen by a space-borne sensor becomes
I=I0Z
s(λ)α(λ)e−γΣN
i=0Ai(λ)lidλ (2)
where the two passes through the atmosphere are taken into account in γ(which is a function of
both the sun azimuth angle and the satellite view angle). The reflection coefficient of the ground is
represented in the formula by the surface albedo α(λ).
In the presence of a methane emission, characterized by lleak, the intensity of the light seen by the
sensors becomes
Ileak =I0Z
s(λ)α(λ)e−γΣN
i=0Ai(λ)lie−ACH4(λ)lleakdλ (3)
To estimate the methane column enhancement, we exploit the correlation between SWIR bands,
similar to multiple-band-multiple-pass (MBMP) [ 25]. We take ratio of Ileak(represents the target
date of leakage) and I(reference day when there was no leak). This enhancement map is fed to
feature extractor as input.
We utilize knowledge distillation to train the proposed network using 1200 data samples. Due to
space constraint, we have put the training and inference details in the supplementary section.
3Figure 2: Methane emissions were detected at the Oil and Gas operator sites where the pilot was
conducted. The images display a concentration mask overlaid on RGB imagery from Sentinel-2
satellite, covering an area of 10 km ×10 km. The red pin marks the location of interest, with
increasing red intensity indicating higher methane concentrations. Out of 11 total detection, we
present two from site 1 and one from site 2. Notably, site 2 reveals an unexpected detection in a
neighboring area with a concentration of approximately 1200 kg/hr, highlighted by the red arrow.
4 Results
In this section, we present the qualitative results from a pilot test conducted in collaboration with an
Oil and Gas operator based in Los Angeles. For the test, we focused on two sites of interest, using
Sentinel-2 satellite data collected between 2016 and 2022. Our analysis on these sites revealed 11
instances of methane emissions at Site 1, while no emissions were detected at Site 2. Few sample
visualizations are shown in Fig. 2. The relatively low number of detection instances can be attributed
to the stringent regulations in Los Angeles, which likely result in fewer large emissions exceeding the
1000 kg/hr detection threshold of the Sentinel-2 satellite. It’s important to note that there may have
been additional emission events that were not detected by our model. These undetected instances
likely involved smaller concentrations of methane that were below the sensitivity threshold of the
satellite sensor. Despite this, the preliminary results are encouraging and highlight the potential for
further refinement and validation of our model in future studies.
5 Conclusion
This paper presents Methane SatelliteMapper – a hyperspectral Transformer specifically designed for
methane plume detection. Methane SatelliteMapper effectively leverages both spectral and spatial
correlations through an advanced spectral feature generator and a query refiner to accurately delineate
CH4plumes. We demonstrate promising results from an ongoing pilot test conducted over six years
of data from an oil and gas site in Los Angeles. Future work will focus on enhancing this model by
collecting additional ground truth data samples and adapting the MethaneHotSpot dataset for use
with Sentinel-2 satellite imagery.
References
[1]Jérôme Barré, Ilse Aben, Anna Agustí-Panareda, Gianpaolo Balsamo, Nicolas Bousserez, Peter Dueben,
Richard Engelen, Antje Inness, Alba Lorente, Joe McNorton, et al. Systematic detection of local ch 4
anomalies by combining satellite measurements with high-resolution forecasts. Atmospheric Chemistry
and Physics , 21(6):5117–5136, 2021.
[2] Mary Crowell. President biden announces new methane emissions reduction strategy, 2022.
4[3]Daniel H Cusworth, Daniel J Jacob, Daniel J Varon, Christopher Chan Miller, Xiong Liu, Kelly Chance,
Andrew K Thorpe, Riley M Duren, Charles E Miller, David R Thompson, et al. Potential of next-generation
imaging spectrometers to detect and quantify methane point sources from space. Atmospheric Measurement
Techniques , 12(10):5655–5668, 2019.
[4]Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth
16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020.
[5]Thibaud Ehret, Aurélien De Truchis, Matthieu Mazzolini, Jean-Michel Morel, Alexandre d’Aspremont,
Thomas Lauvaux, Riley Duren, Daniel Cusworth, and Gabriele Facciolo. Global tracking and quantification
of oil and gas methane emissions from recurrent sentinel-2 imagery. Environmental science & technology ,
56(14):10517–10529, 2022.
[6]Thibaud Ehret, Aurélien De Truchis, Matthieu Mazzolini, Jean-Michel Morel, A. d’Aspremont, Thomas
Lauvaux, Riley M. Duren, Daniel H. Cusworth, and Gabriele Facciolo. Global tracking and quantification
of oil and gas methane emissions from recurrent sentinel-2 imagery. Environmental science & technology ,
2022.
[7]Takashi Hamazaki, Yutaka Kaneko, Akihiko Kuze, and Kayoko Kondo. Fourier transform spectrometer for
greenhouse gases observing satellite (gosat). In Enabling sensor and platform technologies for spaceborne
remote sensing , volume 5659, pages 73–80. SPIE, 2005.
[8]Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016.
[9]ASM Iftekhar, Satish Kumar, R Austin McEver, Suya You, and BS Manjunath. Gtnet: Guided transformer
network for detecting human-object interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00596 , 2021.
[10] Fabrizio Innocenti, Rod Robinson, Tom Gardiner, Andrew Finlayson, and Andy Connor. Differential
absorption lidar (dial) measurements of landfill methane emissions. Remote sensing , 9(9):953, 2017.
[11] Daniel J Jacob, Alexander J Turner, Joannes D Maasakkers, Jianxiong Sheng, Kang Sun, Xiong Liu,
Kelly Chance, Ilse Aben, Jason McKeever, and Christian Frankenberg. Satellite observations of atmo-
spheric methane and their value for quantifying methane emissions. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics ,
16(22):14371–14396, 2016.
[12] Satish Kumar, Ivan Arevalo, ASM Iftekhar, and BS Manjunath. Methanemapper: Spectral absorption
aware hyperspectral transformer for methane detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17609–17618, 2023.
[13] Satish Kumar, ASM Iftekhar, Michael Goebel, Tom Bullock, Mary H MacLean, Michael B Miller, Tyler
Santander, Barry Giesbrecht, Scott T Grafton, and BS Manjunath. Stressnet: detecting stress in thermal
videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages
999–1009, 2021.
[14] Satish Kumar, ASM Iftekhar, Ekta Prashnani, and BS Manjunath. Locl: Learning object-attribute composi-
tion using localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03780 , 2022.
[15] Satish Kumar, William Kingwill, Rozanne Mouton, Wojciech Adamczyk, Robert Huppertz, and Evan D
Sherwin. Guided transformer network for detecting methane emissions in sentinel-2 satellite imagery. In
NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning , 2022.
[16] Satish Kumar, Carlos Torres, Oytun Ulutan, Alana Ayasse, Dar Roberts, and BS Manjunath. Deep remote
sensing methods for methane detection in overhead hyperspectral imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 1776–1785, 2020.
[17] Satish Kumar, Bowen Zhang, Chandrakanth Gudavalli, Connor Levenson, Lacey Hughey, Jared A Stabach,
Irene Amoke, Gordon Ojwang, Joseph Mukeka, Stephen Mwiu, et al. Wildlifemapper: Aerial image
analysis for multi-species detection and identification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 12594–12604, 2024.
[18] Ira Leifer, Dar Roberts, Jack Margolis, and Frank Kinnaman. In situ sensing of methane emissions from
natural marine hydrocarbon seeps: A potential remote sensing technology. Earth and Planetary Science
Letters , 245(3-4):509–522, 2006.
[19] US Department of State. U.s.-eu joint press release on the global methane pledge energy pathway, 2022.
5[20] Sudhanshu Pandey, Ritesh Gautam, Sander Houweling, Hugo Denier Van Der Gon, Pankaj Sadavarte,
Tobias Borsdorff, Otto Hasekamp, Jochen Landgraf, Paul Tol, Tim Van Kempen, et al. Satellite observations
reveal extreme methane leakage from a natural gas well blowout. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences , 116(52):26376–26381, 2019.
[21] Darius Phiri, Matamyo Simwanda, Serajis Salekin, Vincent R Nyirenda, Yuji Murayama, and Manjula
Ranagalage. Sentinel-2 data for land cover/use mapping: a review. Remote Sensing , 12(14):2291, 2020.
[22] Dar A Roberts, Eliza S Bradley, Ross Cheung, Ira Leifer, Philip E Dennison, and Jack S Margolis. Mapping
methane emissions from a marine geological seep source using imaging spectrometry. Remote Sensing of
Environment , 114(3):592–606, 2010.
[23] Oliver Schneising, Michael Buchwitz, Maximilian Reuter, Steffen Vanselow, Heinrich Bovensmann, and
John P Burrows. Remote sensing of methane leakage from natural gas and petroleum systems revisited.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 20(15):9169–9182, 2020.
[24] Hind Taud and JF Mas. Multilayer perceptron (mlp). In Geomatic approaches for modeling land change
scenarios , pages 451–455. Springer, 2018.
[25] Daniel J Varon, Dylan Jervis, Jason McKeever, Ian Spence, David Gains, and Daniel J Jacob. High-
frequency monitoring of anomalous methane point sources with multispectral sentinel-2 satellite observa-
tions. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , 14(4):2771–2785, 2021.
[26] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems ,
30, 2017.
[27] J Pepijn Veefkind, I Aben, K McMullan, H Förster, J De Vries, G Otter, Jacques Claas, HJ Eskes,
JF De Haan, Q Kleipool, et al. Tropomi on the esa sentinel-5 precursor: A gmes mission for global
observations of the atmospheric composition for climate, air quality and ozone layer applications. Remote
sensing of environment , 120:70–83, 2012.
[28] T Yokota, Y Yoshida, N Eguchi, Y Ota, T Tanaka, H Watanabe, and S Maksyutov. Global concentrations
of co2 and ch4 retrieved from gosat: First preliminary results. Sola, 5:160–163, 2009.
[29] Zhan Zhang, Evan D Sherwin, Daniel J Varon, and Adam R Brandt. Detecting and quantifying methane
emissions from oil and gas production: algorithm development with ground-truth calibration based on
sentinel-2 satellite imagery. EGUsphere , pages 1–23, 2022.
6