Personalizing Sustainable Agriculture with Causal
Machine Learning
Georgios Giannarakis
BEYOND Centre, IAASARS
National Observatory of Athens
giannarakis@noa.grVasileios Sitokonstantinou
BEYOND Centre, IAASARS
National Observatory of Athens
vsito@noa.gr
Roxanne Suzette Lorilla
BEYOND Centre, IAASARS
National Observatory of Athens
rslorilla@noa.grCharalampos Kontoes
BEYOND Centre, IAASARS
National Observatory of Athens
kontoes@noa.gr
Abstract
To fight climate change and accommodate the increasing population, global crop
production has to be strengthened. To achieve the “sustainable intensification”
of agriculture, transforming it from carbon emitter to carbon sink is a priority,
and understanding the environmental impact of agricultural management practices
is a fundamental prerequisite to that. At the same time, the global agricultural
landscape is deeply heterogeneous, with differences in climate, soil, and land use
inducing variations in how agricultural systems respond to farmer actions. The
“personalization” of sustainable agriculture with the provision of locally adapted
management advice is thus a necessary condition for the efficient uplift of green
metrics, and an integral development in imminent policies. Here, we formulate
personalized sustainable agriculture as a Conditional Average Treatment Effect
estimation task and use Causal Machine Learning for tackling it. Leveraging
climate data, land use information and employing Double Machine Learning, we
estimate the heterogeneous effect of sustainable practices on the field-level Soil
Organic Carbon content in Lithuania. We thus provide a data-driven perspective
for targeting sustainable practices and effectively expanding the global carbon sink.
1 Introduction
Climate change poses a multidimensional, complex challenge to humankind. In this context, agricul-
ture faces a unique situation. On the one hand, production must keep rising up to meet ever-increasing
demands [1], a task that is significantly complicated by inflation, crises, and extreme, unpredictable
events [2,3,4]. On the other hand, it must do so in a sustainable way. Owing to decades of scientific
research, the consequences of environmentally oblivious agricultural practices are by now well
understood [5,6]. A unique opportunity also surfaced; since agricultural land comprises 38% of
the global land surface [7], agriculture offers a clear path towards mitigating climate change, by
maximizing the carbon that crops naturally sequester, thus creating a substantial carbon sink [8].
As a result, insights on the impacts of sustainable agricultural practices, especially with regards to
their effect on Soil Organic Carbon (SOC) are invaluable, not only for sustainability purposes, but
also for the reliability, fairness, and transparency of modern agricultural carbon markets. At the same
time, the global agricultural landscape contains significant diversity in terms of climate, soil, and
land use. Such diversity of agricultural ecosystems frequently results in heterogeneous responses to
interventions carried out by farmers; as an example, the effect of fertilizers on soil organic matter may
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2022.differ depending on soil pH [9]. This reality is now recognized and reflected on high-stakes policy
making. In an effort to ensure a sustainable future, the latest iteration of the Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP) of the European Union explicitly provides greater flexibility for adapting its measures
to local conditions [10]. From the perspective of artificial intelligence, such endeavor entails a
personalization problem, where the end goal is to provide the farmer with targeted advice, depending
on the particular farming context, on best practices to use in order to uplift sustainable metrics, such
as SOC, and e.g., reimburse them accordingly. In this context, causal Machine Learning (ML) can
efficiently leverage big Earth Observation (EO) data and other agricultural information in order to
arrive at quantitative insights on the impacts of sustainable agriculture. Due to the large geographical
coverage attained by EO, such methods can estimate effect heterogeneity even at the field-level,
hence providing personalized and truly actionable advice towards sustainability goals. In this paper,
we apply causal ML to understand the heterogeneous response of SOC content to a sustainable
agriculture program and showcase a methodology for its personalization.
2 Related Work
Over the past decade, ML methods have made significant contributions in a variety of important
tasks, including yield prediction, or pest, weed, and disease detection [11]. While such work has
been fundamental in advancing precision agriculture, it is primarily based on predictive, correlation-
based models, and is hence inadequate for assessing causal relations. Recently, works that aim to
explicitly model cause and effect have been published. Enabled by large-scale EO data, among other
sources, researchers have used new causal ML methods to infer the impact of conservation tillage on
yield [12], or assess the suitability of agricultural land for applying crop rotation and diversification
[13]. Causal forests [14] have been employed [15] for evaluating the environmental effectiveness
of various agri-environment schemes [16]. However, results were obtained either on a lower spatial
resolution, hindering the field-level personalization of advice [12, 13], or for a single year only [15],
impeding the capture of slow, long-term environmental dynamics, such as those characterising soil
[17]. Here, we utilize field-level SOC predictions and other geospatial data to propose a multi-year,
fully personalized framework for assessing the effect of sustainable practices on SOC content and
guide decision-making. We report preliminary results for a case study in Lithuania.
3 Data and Methods
Dataset. We use data from the Lithuanian Land Parcel Identification System (LPIS) that contains
national-scale information on the crop type that was cultivated on each geo-referenced field as
declared by the farmers in their CAP subsidy applications. Data also contain a binary variable that
indicates if a field was enrolled in an eco-friendly program and employed sustainable agricultural
management practices for that year. Data were collected annually, spanning a 5-year period from
2017 to 2021. In order to control for climate-induced confounding we incorporate 9 climate variables
retrieved from the ERA5 database, namely air temperature, soil temperature and moisture, northward
and eastward wind speed, evapotranspiration, leaf area index, runoff and precipitation [18]. To
complete the data, we include field-level predictions of SOC content [19, 20], on which we want to
examine the impact of sustainable practices. Due to the dependence of the SOC content prediction
method on the absence of cloud cover, we currently only use a single SOC content value for the entire
5-year period. While increasing the temporal resolution of SOC content would provide more granular
insights, we note that due to the slowly changing soil properties [17], the single value we have may
potentially be decently representative of the reference period and subsets of it.
Methods. We model the problem of assessing the causal effect of eco-friendly practices on SOC
content in different farming contexts as a Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE) estimation
task. Using the Potential Outcomes framework, let Y(T)denote the value (potential outcome) of
a random variable Yif we were to treat a unit with a binary treatment T∈ {0,1}. Given a vector
Xdescribing the units, the CATE is the function θ(x) =E[Y(1)−Y(0)|X=x]. In our case,
Tis the binary variable that indicates whether a field was enrolled in the eco-friendly program,
andY(1), Y(0)are, respectively, the SOC content the field would have had if it was enrolled in
the eco-friendly program ( T= 1) or not ( T= 0). The feature vector Xcaptures important field
characteristics that drive effect heterogeneity. Here, to segment the analysis per crop type, Xconsists
of 3 binary variables, corresponding to the 3 most prominent crops found in the dataset during the
2reference period (Table 1). We then use Double Machine Learning (DML) [21] to learn θ(x)from
the dataset, and estimate the effect of sustainable practices on SOC content as a function of x.
4 Results
In a preliminary analysis, we designated as “treated” the fields that employed sustainable practices
for the years 2021 and 2020, and as “control” the rest. We thus temporally aggregated all ERA5
climate variables over these two years, ending up with a single (average) value for each variable per
field. We applied a standard scaler to all numerical features, and used a Random Forest Regressor and
Classifier for the internal predictive DML tasks. To retain full inference on causal effect estimates,
we used the Linear DML version, as implemented in [22].
Figure 1: Color coded CATE point estimates
for selected fields. Dark fields have larger (non-
significant) estimates and are expected to better
accommodate sustainable practices in terms of
their impact on SOC content.Conditional Average Treatment Effects
Crops PP SP WW
Point Estimate 0.06 -0.08 -0.09
Standard Error 0.14 0.17 0.28
Z-score 0.41 -0.44 -0.32
P-value 0.69 0.66 0.75
95% CI (Lower) -0.22 -0.42 -0.63
95% CI (Higher) 0.34 0.26 0.45
Table 1: CATE point estimates and associated
uncertainty. PP = Perennial Pastures, SP =
Simple Pastures, WW = Winter Wheat. SOC
content is reported as a percentage of topsoil
(0-10 cm).
The most prominent crops found in the dataset consisted of fields with perennial pastures (PP) in both
2021 and 2020, followed by simple pastures (SP) and winter wheat (WW), also in both years. Table 1
contains the corresponding CATE estimates, quantifying the causal effect of sustainable practices on
SOC content per crop, and Figure 1 visualizes them for a few indicative fields. None of the effects
are currently statistically significant at the 95% confidence level, a sensible result given the short time
window the treatment refers to, its discrepancy with the 5-year period the SOC content values were
derived from, and the slow rate of change of soil properties. As we incorporate more years and data in
the analysis we will be able to explore interesting scientific questions, such as assessing whether the
eco-friendly program was most efficient in perennial pastures and corroborate the growing evidence
on the environmental benefits of perennialization [23].
5 Conclusions and Future Work
Our work can assist policy makers in efficiently implementing sustainable agricultural management
and simultaneously enable the smart allocation of farmer subsidies, a task that has proven to be
challenging [24]. Climate, soil, and other land use information may also be included in the data in
order to adapt the estimates on any local condition experts deem important. In that way, the idea
presented in this paper can develop into a useful tool for sustainable agriculture, in line with modern
policy needs and encompassing the entire agricultural chain from the policy maker to the farmer. To
proceed, the temporal range of the treatment should be extended to align with the 5-year SOC content
period, and domain knowledge should be incorporated in the model through structural approaches
[25]. The inclusion of more data on field-level agricultural practices is also important for reducing
the bias of estimates. Finally, given the general absence of ground truth, estimates should be tested
for robustness by employing modern sensitivity analyses [26].
3Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work has been supported by the EIFFEL project (EU Horizon 2020 - GA No. 101003518) and
the MICROSERVICES project (2019-2020 BiodivERsA joint call, under the BiodivClim ERA-Net
COFUND programme, and with the GSRI, Greece - No. T12ERA5-00075).
References
[1] Tilman, D., Balzer, C., Hill, J., & Befort, B. L. (2011). Global food demand and the sustainable intensification
of agriculture. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 108(50), 20260-20264.
[2] Sivakumar, M. V ., Motha, R. P., & Das, H. P. (Eds.). (2005). Natural disasters and extreme events in
agriculture: impacts and mitigation. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[3] Gray, R. S. (2020). Agriculture, transportation, and the COVID-19 crisis. Canadian Journal of Agricultural
Economics/Revue canadienne d’agroeconomie, 68(2), 239-243.
[4] Brunelle, T., Dumas, P., Souty, F., Dorin, B., & Nadaud, F. (2015). Evaluating the impact of rising fertilizer
prices on crop yields. Agricultural economics, 46(5), 653-666.
[5] Tsiafouli, M. A., Thébault, E., Sgardelis, ... & Hedlund, K. (2015). Intensive agriculture reduces soil
biodiversity across Europe. Global change biology, 21(2), 973-985.
[6] Robertson, G. P., Paul, E. A., & Harwood, R. R. (2000). Greenhouse gases in intensive agriculture:
contributions of individual gases to the radiative forcing of the atmosphere. Science, 289(5486), 1922-1925.
[7] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Land use in agriculture by the numbers,
URL https://www.fao.org/sustainability/news/detail/en/c/1274219/
[8] Toensmeier, E. (2016). The carbon farming solution: A global toolkit of perennial crops and regenerative
agriculture practices for climate change mitigation and food security. Chelsea Green Publishing.
[9] Heinze, S., Raupp, J., & Joergensen, R. G. (2010). Effects of fertilizer and spatial heterogeneity in soil pH on
microbial biomass indices in a long-term field trial of organic agriculture. Plant and Soil, 328(1), 203-215.
[10] European Commission, The new common agricultural policy: 2023-27, URL
https://agriculture.ec.europa.eu/common-agricultural-policy/cap-overview/new-cap-2023-27_en
[11] Liakos, K. G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., & Bochtis, D. (2018). Machine learning in agriculture:
A review. Sensors, 18(8), 2674.
[12] Deines, J. M., Wang, S., & Lobell, D. B. (2019). Satellites reveal a small positive yield effect from
conservation tillage across the US Corn Belt. Environmental Research Letters, 14(12), 124038.
[13] Giannarakis, G., Sitokonstantinou, V ., Lorilla, R. S., & Kontoes, C. (2022). Towards assessing agricultural
land suitability with causal machine learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (pp. 1442-1452).
[14] Wager, S., & Athey, S. (2018). Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using random
forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523), 1228-1242.
[15] Stetter, C., Mennig, P., & Sauer, J. (2022). Using Machine Learning to Identify Heterogeneous Impacts of
Agri-Environment Schemes in the EU: A Case Study. European Review of Agricultural Economics.
[16] Batáry, P., Dicks, L. V ., Kleijn, D., & Sutherland, W. J. (2015). The role of agri-environment schemes in
conservation and environmental management. Conservation Biology, 29(4), 1006-1016.
[17] Smith, P. (2004). How long before a change in soil organic carbon can be detected?. Global Change Biology,
10(11), 1878-1883.
[18] Hersbach, H., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., ... & Thépaut, J. N. (2020). The ERA5 global reanalysis. Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 146(730), 1999-2049.
[19] Tziolas, N., Tsakiridis, N., Ogen, Y ., Kalopesa, E., Ben-Dor, E., Theocharis, J., & Zalidis, G. (2020). An
integrated methodology using open soil spectral libraries and Earth Observation data for soil organic carbon
estimations in support of soil-related SDGs. Remote Sensing of Environment, 244, 111793.
[20] Karyotis, K., Samarinas, N., Tsakiridis, N., Tziolas, N., Kokkas, S., Tsiakos, V ., Bliziotis, D., Kalopesa, E.,
& Zalidis, G. (2022). Synergy between Spaceborne optical Imagery and in-situ Soil Spectroscopy for Organic
Carbon estimations over exposed lands. 26th MARS Conference.
4[21] Chernozhukov, V ., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., Hansen, C., Newey, W., & Robins, J. (2018).
Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters.
[22] Battocchi, K., Dillon, E., Hei, M., Lewis, G., Oka, P., Oprescu, M., & Syrgkanis, V . (2019) EconML: A
Python Package for ML-Based Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Estimation.
[23] Mosier, S., Cordova, S., & Robertson, G. P. (2021). Restoring soil fertility on degraded lands to meet food,
fuel, and climate security needs via perennialization. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 356.
[24] European Court of Auditors. (2017). Greening: a more complex income support scheme, not yet
environmentally effective. Special Report, (21).
[25] Pearl, J. (2009). Causality. Cambridge university press.
[26] Cinelli, C., & Hazlett, C. (2020). Making sense of sensitivity: Extending omitted variable bias. Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 82(1), 39-67.
5