Hyperspectral shadow removal with Iterative Logistic
Regression and latent Parametric Linear Combination
of Gaussians
Core Francisco Park
Department of Physics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.
corefranciscopark@g.harvard.eduMaya Nasr
John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.
mayanasr@g.harvard.edu
Manuel Pérez-Carrasco
Data Science Unit
University of Concepcion
Biobio, Chile
maperezc@inf.udec.clEleanor Walker
John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.
ewalker@g.harvard.edu
Douglas Finkbeiner
Department of Physics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.
dfinkbeiner@cfa.harvard.eduCecilia Garraffo
AstroAI
Center for Astrophysics |Harvard & Smithsonian
Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.
cgarraffo@cfa.harvard.edu
Abstract
Shadow detection and removal is a challenging problem in the analysis of hyper-
spectral images. Yet, this step is crucial for analyzing data for remote sensing
applications like methane detection. In this work, we develop a shadow detection
and removal method only based on the spectrum of each pixel and the overall
distribution of spectral values. We first introduce Iterative Logistic Regression
(ILR) to learn a spectral basis in which shadows can be linearly classified. We then
model the joint distribution of the mean radiance and the projection coefficients of
the spectra onto the above basis as a parametric linear combination of Gaussians.
We can then extract the maximum likelihood mixing parameter of the Gaussians to
estimate the shadow coverage and to correct the shadowed spectra. Our correction
scheme reduces correction artefacts at shadow borders. The shadow detection and
removal method is applied to hyperspectral images from MethaneAIR, a precursor
to the satellite MethaneSAT.
1 Introduction
Methane is the second most important greenhouse gas following carbon dioxide. MethaneSAT is a
satellite mission aiming to map the methane density in the atmosphere[ 1]. For this and other similar
missions, careful analysis of the hyperspectral image resulting from the detector is essential to retrieve
the target atmospheric components. Two significant challenges in image analysis are clouds and
shadows[ 2]. In the case of MethaneSAT, a cloud essentially blocks the retrieval of methane density
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2023.Figure 1: Hyperspectral data from MethaneAIR. (Left) The mean radiance for all pixels. (Middle)
The spectrum at each of the 3 points on the left image. (Right) The map of labels. “Sure Ground" and
“Sure Cloud" are simple made by binary erosion of the shadow and ground labels.
under it. However, depending on the indirect ground illumination, shadowed pixels might carry a
detectable signal. These pixels could either be processed by a different downstream pipeline or be
corrected for the effect of the shadow before entering the subsequent pipelines. In this work, we
present a probabilistic latent spectral space inference method to remove the average effect of a shadow
on a spectrum, while preserving the original spectral features as much as possible. This method is
applied to hyperspectral images from MethaneAIR, a precursor to the MethaneSAT satellite.
2 Method
Data We use hyperspectral imaging data from a MethaneAIR flight [ 2]. Our data is a set of
hyperspectral images with 1024 spectral bins and varying width and height. An image with clouds
and shadows within the field of view is in Fig. 1. The most evident feature of a shadow is the reduced
mean radiance. To enhance the method to learn spectral shape changes by shadows, we explicitly
remove the mean radiance ( mi) by dividing each spectrum by its mean and taking the logarithm.
Thus each spectrum fiis normalized as si= log( fi/mi).logis the natural logarithm everywhere.
Iterative Logistic Regression and Latent Basis Learning Using spectra and binary labels( si∈
R1024, yi∈[0,1]) from sunlit and shadowed pixels, we train our Iterative Logistic Regression(ILR),
described in Algorithm 1. On each iteration, the best spectral weight separating shadowed pixels and
bright pixels are learned by a logistic regression and projected out from the data, until the classification
accuracy becomes negligible. The resulting weights( W∈ R(k,1024)) form a k-dimensional spectral
basis for the latent space and the projection coefficients of each spectrum onto this basis( βi∈
Rks.t.si=βT
iW+snull
i) becomes the features of each spectrum in this basis. In practice the
dimensionality of this space is much smaller than the number of spectral bins, in our case k= 23 .
Algorithm 1 Iterative Logistic Regression
Require: x∈ R(n,p), y∈[0,1]n, fthres∈(0,1) ▷Dataset with n rows and p features
W= []; f1= 1
while f1≥fthres do ▷Repeat until the data is hard to classify
xTr, yTr, xTe, yTe=split(x, y)
w=get_wLR(xTr, yTr) ▷Get the separating hyperplane from logistic regression
ˆyTe=σ(xTe·w)>0.5;f1=get_f1(yTe,ˆyTe) ▷Get the predictions, σis a sigmoid
x←x−x·w/||w||2 ▷Project out this component
W.append (w)
end while
return matrix(W)
Joint estimation of shadow fraction and mean radiance for border pixels. Now, we construct a
new feature space for each pixel by combining the log average radiance ( log(mi)) andβi. This is
our (k+1) dimensional latent spectrum, ei∈ Rk+1, with ei,0= log( mi). We approximate the joint
distribution for the sunlit latent spectrum (subscript g for ground) and the shadowed latent spectrum
2(subscript s for shadow) as Gaussian distributions. Our model then assumes each latent spectrum
on the border is a draw from a linear combination of these Gaussians. It is important to note that
our model is not a Gaussian Mixture Model(GMM) but simply a Parametric Linear Combination of
Gaussians(PLCG).
eb
i∼(1−αi)Ng(µg,Σg) +αiNs(µs,Σs) (0 ≤α≤1) (1)
where eb
iis a border latent spectrum, αis the mixing parameter and µg,Σg,µs,Σsare the means and
covariances for the ground and shadowed latent spectrum, respectively. The superscript iindicates
that each border latent spectrum is assumed to be drawn from a distribution resulting from a different
mixing parameter. When α= 0the border latent spectrum is just a draw from Ngand for α= 1it is
a draw from Ns, thus αis a parameter representing how much a spectrum is covered by a shadow.
We can then estimate αindependently for each border latent spectrum using maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) under a Gaussian likelihood1.
α∗
i=argmax αiL(αi|eb
i) (2)
logL(αi|eb
i) =−1
2log(|Σ(α)|)−1
2(eb
i−µ(α))TΣ−1(α)(eb
i−µ(α)) +C (3)
µ(α) = (1 −α)µg+αµsΣ(α) = (1 −α)Σg+αΣs (4)
Since the latent space’s dimension is small( O(10)), and αis a single parameter, a simple grid search
can be performed to find the (MLE) α. Then each corrected border spectrum (and its mean) can be
obtained as:
e′b
i=Si(eb
i−µ(α∗
i)) +µg (5)
s′b
i= (e′b
i,1:k)TW+snull
i and log(¯ si) =e′b
i,0 (6)
where Sis an identity matrix everywhere except S00=p
Σg00/Σ(α∗
i)00. This S00term scales ei,0
by the ratio of standard deviation of log(mi)of ground spectra to shadow spectra, so that the whole
region under a shadow doesn’t end up with a lower contrast. This is motivated by the fact that we
only want to correct for the average effect of the shadows while keeping the spectral variances as
they are.
3 Results
ILR and shadow basis learning Fig. 2 shows ILR applied to MethaneAIR data with ground and
shadow labels. After k= 23 iterations, the F1-score is negligible and we have extracted the basis
vectors relevant for linear shadow classification. From the joint distribution of the mean radiance and
the shadow coefficients of every pixel, we find that the “sure ground" and “sure shadow" can both be
described as a (k+1)-dimensional Gaussian distribution, while the border pixels are scattered between
them.
Shadow Correction Fig. 3 illustrates our correction method and its results. We find that the
posterior cloud fraction is, as expected, a tight function of the mean radiance. We find that our
reconstruction scheme is better than adjusting the mean radiance by a factor determined from the raw
probabilities of logistic regression. This is illustrated in the bottom center panel of Fig. 3, where the
cloud probability is discontinuous and does contain information about the shift in the mean radiance.
A mean correction thus results in an over-correction right inside the shadow and a under-correction
right outside the shadow. Our method mitigates this effect.
4 Discussion
Objective of shadow removal Our method casts shadow removal into a slightly different problem
than in the literature. Previous works [ 3,4,5], focus on retrieving the radiance and spectral shape
which would have been measured if the shadow was not present. Here, we focus on removing the
average effect of having a shadow cast on a pixel, while conserving the original spectrum as much as
possible.
1This assumes the two distributions are jointly Gaussian distributed
3Figure 2: Iterative Logistic Regression and the shadow basis (Left) F1-score as components relevant
to shadow classification are iteratively removed. (Middle) The learned spectral weights( W) forming
the shadow basis. (Right) The joint distribution of the log-mean radiance and the first shadow
coefficient( (mi, eb
i,1)). We observe that the sunlit spectra is roughly e1.5∼4.5times brighter than
the shadowed spectra.
Figure 3: Our shadow correction method. (Top Left) The inferred posterior cloud fraction as a
function of mean radiance. (Top Center) Our correction method illustrated. The olive colored points
are samples from the inferred mixture of Gaussians. (Top Right) The distribution shift in latent
space from our correction method. (Bottom Left) the mean based correction and our correction
(Bottom Center) Our correction method across a shadow border(red line). (Bottom Right) Spectral
correction from our method. The spectra are corrected from the magenta point and is compared with
the reference spectrum from the blue point.
Impact towards tackling climate change Our approach increases the raw amount of area from
which methane emission can be detected[ 2]. MethaneAIR has two spectrometers targeting 1236-1319
nm for O2and 1592-1697 nm for CO 2andCH 4(1249-1305 nm and 1598-1683 nm respectively
for MethaneSAT). MethaneAIR detects the total column-averaged dry-air mole fractions of CH 4
(XCH 4) by the CO 2proxy method [ 6] using the second (longer wavelength) spectrometer. This
requires accurate spectra at the P and R bands of CO 2(1595–1618 nm) and the 2ν3band of CH 4
(1629–1654 nm) [ 7]. These bands correspond roughly to spectral channel indices 50-250 and 350-550
in the x-axis of Fig. 3, bottom right. We find that our correction method is significantly different from
4the mean based correction in these regions and thus demonstrates that it might affect the methane
detection significantly. We plan to study this more carefully in a future work.
Limitations and Future Work A major limitation of the presented model is that it is agnostic about
any spatial priors, and this limits the estimation of the shadow coverage at the borders. This is the
main reason our shadow removal, although better than merely correcting the mean of the distribution,
has spatial artifacts at the shadow borders. We believe the introduction of spatial priors added to the
likelihood function in Eq. 3 will improve our method and further reduce over/under-corrections.
Our method doesn’t make use of any assumptions specific to shadows, so the same model can be
used to correct for other continuous artifacts.
5 Conclusion
We have developed a method to detect and remove the average effect of shadows from a hyperspectral
image using only binary shadow and ground labels. We plan to enhance the model using spatial
priors and apply it to MethaneAIR and MethaneSAT images for additional detection of methane in
shadowed areas.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
CFP gratefully acknowledges Dr. Steven Wofsy and Christopher Chan Miller for providing the data
used in this work and for useful discussions. This work is supported by the Environmental Defense
Fund and by MethaneSAT.org, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Environmental Defense Fund. The
computations in this paper were run on the FASRC Cannon cluster supported by the FAS Division
of Science Research Computing Group at Harvard University. This collaboration was facilitated by
EarthAI and AstroAI.
References
[1]Reuben R Rohrschneider, Steven Wofsy, Jonathan E Franklin, Joshua Benmergui, Juancarlos
Soto, and Spencer B Davis. The methanesat mission. 2021.
[2]Apisada Chulakadabba, Maryann Sargent, Thomas Lauvaux, Joshua S Benmergui, Jonathan E
Franklin, Christopher Chan Miller, Jonas S Wilzewski, Sébastien Roche, Eamon Conway, Amir H
Souri, et al. Methane point source quantification using methaneair: A new airborne imaging
spectrometer. EGUsphere , 2023:1–22, 2023.
[3]Guichen Zhang, Daniele Cerra, and Rupert Müller. Shadow detection and restoration for
hyperspectral images based on nonlinear spectral unmixing. Remote Sensing , 12(23):3985, 2020.
[4]Min Zhao, Jie Chen, and Susanto Rahardja. Hyperspectral shadow removal via nonlinear
unmixing. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , 18(5):881–885, 2021.
[5] Puhong Duan, Shangsong Hu, Xudong Kang, and Shutao Li. Shadow removal of hyperspectral
remote sensing images with multiexposure fusion. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing , 60:1–11, 2022.
[6]Christian Frankenberg, U Platt, and T Wagner. Iterative maximum a posteriori (imap)-doas for
retrieval of strongly absorbing trace gases: Model studies for ch 4 and co 2 retrieval from near
infrared spectra of sciamachy onboard envisat. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics , 5(1):9–22,
2005.
[7]Christopher Chan Miller, Sebastien Roche, Jonas S Wilzewksi, Xiong Liu, Kelly Chance, Amir H
Souri, Eamon Conway, Bingkun Luo, Jenna Samra, Jacob Hawthorne, et al. Methane retrieval
from methaneair using the co 2 proxy approach: A demonstration for the upcoming methanesat
mission. EGUsphere , 2023:1–40, 2023.
5