Unlocking the Potential of Renewable Energy Through
Curtailment Prediction
Bilge Acun1, Brent Morgan1, Carole-Jean Wu1, Henry Richardson2, Nat Steinsultz2
1Meta2WattTime
Abstract
A significant fraction (5-15%) of renewable energy generated goes into waste in the
grids around the world today due to oversupply issues and transmission constraints.
Being able to predict when andwhere renewable curtailment occurs would improve
renewable utilization. The core of this work is to enable the machine learning
community to help decarbonize electricity grids by unlocking the potential of
renewable energy through curtailment prediction.
1 Introduction
Decarbonizing electricity grids reliably and cost-effectively is critical towards a clean energy future.
Significant investment into renewable energy infrastructure from the past decade has dramatically
increased the amount of wind and solar deployed on grids around the world from 630 TWh in 2012
to over 3,400 TWh in 2022 [8]. However, as renewable generation increases, the amount of energy
curtailed due to oversupply during certain hours also increases.
Figure 1: Median (solid line) and 25%-75% range
(shaded) of curtailment values, aggregated by time
of day, for SPP (primarily wind curtailment) and
CAISO (primarily solar curtailment).As intermittent renewable energy generation be-
comes increasingly prevalent, the risk of curtail-
ment grows significantly [13]. Curtailment is
a key challenge facing the world where power
grids are decarbonized. For example, 5-15% of
the renewable energy generated is curtailed in
Europe and China respectively [2]. In the US, in
2022, SPP curtailed over 11,000 GWh of wind
energy, which was more than 10% of all wind
energy produced in the region [16]. CAISO
curtailed almost 2,450 GWh of renewable en-
ergy which was almost 7% of all solar energy
produced [9], as illustrated in Figure 1. The
curtailment is happening frequently as well, oc-
curring at some location in CAISO over 30% of
all time steps in 2021, and over 60% of all times
in ERCOT and SPP. The frequent occurrence
of curtailment means that there is opportunity
for greater emissions reductions through careful
load management.
Historically, dispatchable fossil resources were matched to electricity demand from consumers. We
now have the opportunity to reverse that paradigm and match demand to variable renewable energy
supply to sop up the excess clean energy. Flexible loads, like electric vehicle charging, hot water
heating with heat pumps, and delay-tolerant computation in datacenters [1, 11, 14] can be scheduled
to take advantage of this low emissions electricity. For example, managed EV charging can reduce
associated emissions by up to 65% [4]. But to take advantage of this curtailed renewable energy, we
need to accurately predict when and where curtailment occurs — a challenging problem due to the
intermittent nature of renewable energy production.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2023.2 ML for Curtailment Prediction
Understanding when and where renewable energy curtailment occurs provides a massive opportunity
for emissions reductions. When renewable energy is oversupplied, or is constrained by transmission
capacities, it is curtailed. If users could increase load at the times and near places where curtailment
occurs, electricity usage is increased without the associated emission overhead, having near-zero
marginal emissions during that time. For example, managed EV charging can reduce associated
emissions by up to 65% [4]. In addition to lowering carbon emissions, reducing curtailment increases
revenues for renewable energy owners and reduces the overall system costs for grid consumers. As
renewable development continues, the opportunity to reduce emissions through load flexibility will
increase in magnitude, frequency and location. Temporal and spatial granularity of the models are
crucial to detect andforecast the curtailments accurately.
Temporal Granularity: Curtailment can vary significantly from one 5-minute settlement period of
the Independent System Operators (ISO)1. See Appendix Figure 3 for an example five minute-level
time series and Figure 4 for an example of seasonal trends. This means that a successful curtailment
prediction model needs to operate at a granularity finer than hourly.
Spatial Granularity: While curtailment can be a widespread phenomenon, it is most frequently
localized to a subsection of the ISO grid due to transmission constraints. This means that the
geographic granularity needs to be smaller than at the ISO level. Fortunately, there is a growing
resource of ground-truth data about curtailment available now. Many ISOs publish ground truth
curtailment data with varying time delays, typically 30 to 90 days, although some may be as soon
as a day or up to a year delay. The data can have different levels of spatial granularity. Table 1
summarizes the characteristics of the ISO-specific datasets. Unfortunately not all ISOs provide nodal
level granularity. However we propose using locational marginal pricing (LMP) data to serve as a
replacement for granular ground truth data.
2.1 Detecting Curtailment Using Nodal Locational Marginal Pricing (LMP) Data
While detailed information of where curtailed energy is not always available, many ISOs provide
detailed nodal locational marginal pricing (LMP) data realtime. Not all markets globally use nodal
LMP for dispatch, however all major ISOs in the US have moved to a nodal LMP structure. Since
the majority of curtailment in current markets is driven by economic dispatch, LMP provides useful
information about where curtailment is addressable. Renewable generators typically bid at zero
or negative prices, so it is reasonable to assume that when nodal LMP crosses below a certain
threshold, renewable energy is being curtailed or dispatched to meet marginal changes in demand.
Figure 2-left depicts curtailment frequency as a function of the minimum LMP for CAISO, showing a
50% curtailment likelihood at an LMP of $1.62. The curtailment threshold may be ISO and condition
dependent. Figure 2-right illustrates the significantly varying curtailment that occurs in various
sub-regions of SPP based on the LMP threshold. This underscores the importance of curtailment
prediction at the node granularity. In some ISOs, such as MISO, negative LMP values can be driven
by imports or other types of transmission constraints, which are not related to curtailment.
Since curtailment is a localized phenomenon, it is important that forecasts of curtailment also be
localized. For some use cases, such as grid battery storage, the ability to reduce emissions depends
on accurately forecasting the behavior of individual pricing nodes. Each ISO can have thousands
of unique pricing nodes and because curtailment is driven by extreme shifts in local dispatch, using
averaged LMP values can miss many instances of localized curtailment. Existing work has been done
on forecasting curtailment and marginal emissions, but not at a nodal level [7, 17].
2.2 Forecasting Curtailment
Once we have a reasonable model of when and where curtailment is occurring, accurate forecasting
of those values is critical to driving real-world impact through load-shifting technologies.
Forecasting window: Software-controlled devices could schedule when they use electricity based on
a curtailment forecast. If the model were used to control real-time load, it has to produce predictions
in real-time, using real-time data, as well as short term forecasts to inform load management decisions.
Many load shifting technologies, like grid-scale batteries, have to make decisions some time ahead
1ISO is the entity that manages dispatch of generators in the grid in most regions of the US [3] to the next.
2Figure 2: Left: Curtailment frequency as a function of the minimum LMP for different curtailment
amounts (MW). Right: Heatmap of the times below LMP threshold at nodal level in SPP.
due to market structures or technological constraints. In order to determine the best time to consume
electricity, current conditions need to be compared to what is expected over the entire window of use.
This window can be different for different technologies — low-priority tasks may be able to delay
execution for up to a week, a grid-connected battery may have a 24-hour window in which it can
charge and discharge, a residential EV may have an 8-hour overnight window for charging, and a
smart thermostat may only have a 60 minute window in which it can shift usage before it impacts
home temperatures. For devices that wish to participate in electricity markets, 95% of the energy
transactions are done in a day ahead markets and is based on the load forecasts of the next day [3].
Therefore, 24-hour prediction of the forecasts of curtailment would be the most useful window for
majority of the applications.
Forecasting signal type: Curtailment forecasting can be handled as either a regression or classifica-
tion problem, depending on the data available and the application of the forecasts. Some ISOs only
report a boolean value as to whether or not curtailment may be occurring, instead of the total amount
of curtailment in MWh. For many load-shifting technologies, it may not matter the total amount of
curtailed energy, but simply whether it is above or below some threshold relevant to the application.
For example, it may not matter for the operation of a 50MW battery whether curtailment is 1,000MW
or 10,000MW at a given time, simply that there is sufficient curtailed energy at that time. Thus in
some cases a binary or binned signal may be sufficient for supporting load-shifting applications.
3 Call to Action
Curtailment and emissions-informed load-shifting technology has the potential to reduce real-world
operating emissions today in many locations, which will rapidly increase in the future. To make
this possible, we will need accurate data and forecasts about curtailment. Forecasting granularity,
window andthe signal type are important properties to consider to make a machine learning model
high quality and useful. Existing models today lack these properties. Until more ISOs regularly
publish locationally granular real-time curtailment data, nodal LMP based models can be used to
detect where curtailed energy is likely available. To support this, we have collected, cleaned, and
standardized historical curtailment data and LMP for the ISOs in North America. As part of this call
to action, we have made some curtailment and nodal level LMP data available along with resources
on where more data can be accessed, depending on ISO specific data licenses [15].
Accelerating power grid decarbonization is a key step towards a clean energy economy, where
renewable is the fastest growing energy source. A significant amount of renewable energy is stranded
in the grids today because of oversupply and transmission congestion. To realize the full potential of
renewable energy, we need a coordinated approach:
3•This paper takes the first step by making compiled datasets of nodal LMP values available
for several ISOs. This enables curtailment prediction using machine learning models.
•We need grid operators to provide more detailed information publicly to give consumers
signals about where curtailed energy is available in order for power consumers to improve
curtailment prediction models. These signals then will enable load shifting decisions by
power consumers.
•We need even more technologies to support carbon-aware load shifting to reduce emissions
in increasingly variable grids. To accomplish this, we will need carbon-aware software stan-
dards, such as the carbon-aware scheduler demonstrated by Low-Carbon Kubernetes Sched-
uler [10], the development of a carbon aware SDK by the Green Software Foundation [6] or
carbon-aware demand response for large-scale datacenters by Carbon Responder [18].
ISO Granularity Reported Data % Time with Curtailment
SPP 5 min System wide curtailed power 47.4
CAISO 5 min System wide curtailed power 23.1
NYISO Hourly System wide curtailed power 7.3
PJM Hourly Percent of nodes with marginal fuel 31.4
MISO Hourly Regonal marginal fuel flag 19.3
ISONE Hourly System wide marginal fuel flag 23.7
ERCOT 5 min Plant output capability and actual output 42.3
IESO Hourly Plant output capability and actual output 35.2
Table 1: Historical curtailment information provided by the ISOs.
References
[1] Bilge Acun et al. “Carbon explorer: A holistic framework for designing carbon aware datacen-
ters”. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 . 2023, pp. 118–132.
[2] Alex Bunodiere and Han Soo Lee. “Renewable Energy Curtailment: Prediction Using a Logic-
Based Forecasting Method and Mitigation Measures in Kyushu, Japan”. In: Energies 13.18
(2020), p. 4703.
[3] Kathryne Cleary and Karen Palmer. US Electricity Markets 101 .https://www.rff.org/
publications/explainers/us-electricity-markets-101/ . 2022.
[4] Lynn Daniels et al. More EVs, Fewer Emissions: How to Maximize Emissions Reductions
by Smart Charging Electric Vehicles .https://rmi.org/insight/more-evs-fewer-
emissions . 2022.
[5] EIA. EIA Open Data API .https://www.eia.gov/opendata/browser/electricity/
rto. 2023.
[6] Green Software Foundation. Opensource / Carbon Aware SDK .https :
/ / greensoftwarefoundation . atlassian . net / wiki / spaces /
~612dd45e45cd76006a84071a/pages/17137665/Opensource+Carbon+Aware+SDK .
2023.
[7] Hengameh Hadian and Farnoosh Naderkhani. “Deep Learning-Based Models for Wind and
Solar Curtailment Forecasting”. In: International Conference on Energy Harvesting, Storage,
and Transfer (2023).
[8] Energy Institute. Statistical Review of World Energy .https://www.energyinst.org/
statistical-review/resources-and-data-downloads . 2023.
[9] California ISO. Managing oversupply .http : / / www . caiso . com / informed / Pages /
ManagingOversupply.aspx . 2023.
[10] Aled James and Daniel Schien. “A Low Carbon Kubernetes Scheduler”. In: ICT4S . 2019.
4[11] Liuzixuan Lin and Andrew A Chien. “Adapting Datacenter Capacity for Greener Datacenters
and Grid”. In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Future Energy
Systems . 2023, pp. 200–213.
[12] NOAA. Global Forecast System (GFS) .https : / / www . ncei . noaa . gov / products /
weather-climate-models/global-forecast . 2023.
[13] Javier López Prol and David Zilberman. “No alarms and no surprises: Dynamics of renewable
energy curtailment in California”. In: Energy Economics (2023), p. 106974.
[14] Ana Radovanovi ´c et al. “Carbon-aware computing for datacenters”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems 38.2 (2022), pp. 1270–1280.
[15] Nat Steinsultz. Nodal LMP and Renewable Curtailment Data in Suppor of Unlocking the
Potential of Renewable Energy Through Curtailment Prediction . Zenodo, Nov. 2023. DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.10235806 .URL:https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10235806 .
[16] Southwest Power Pool Market Monitoring Unit. State of the market .https://www.spp.org/
documents/69330/2022%20annual%20state%20of%20the%20market%20report.pdf .
2022.
[17] Amy Wang and Priya L Donti. “Forecasting Marginal Emissions Factors in PJM”. In: Climate
Change AI Workshop at NeurIPS (2020).
[18] Jiali Xing et al. “Carbon Responder: Coordinating Demand Response for the Datacenter Fleet”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08589 (2023).
A Supplementary Figures
Figure 3: SPP wind curtailment in 5-minute steps on a random day.
Figure 4: CAISO curtailment frequency and amount shown as time series from 2019-2023.
5Figure 5: Illustration of load shifting forecast metrics.
B Forecasting Metrics
While standard error metrics are useful in evaluating curtailment forecasting models, the most
important measure to drive real-world impact is correctly selecting times of curtailment during a
fixed window when load is available. For a load-shifting technology which needs to use c minutes of
energy during a window of length w starting at time t, the impact of using a forecast can be evaluated
as the mean curtailment value during the c lowest minutes of the forecast during ttot+w. This
impact can be compared to the baseline of either immediate usage during the first cminutes of the
window w, or random-time usage, which is equivalent to the mean curtailment value during ttot+w.
Figure 5 provides an illustration of load shifting highlighting the importance these metrics.
C Additional Datasets
There are several additional external data sets that may be useful in detecting and forecasting
curtailment. The EIA makes hourly demand, generation and interchange data available at the ISO
region/sub-region level historically real-time through their API [5]. Many ISOs also independently
make data directly available through an API, including 5-minute demand and generation data, along
with additional datasets such as transmission binding constraints, that may be valuable in addressing
both the temporal and spatial granularity needed for this problem. Given that renewable generation is
driven by meteorological conditions, historical weather forecasts, such as those produced by NOAA’s
GFS model [12] are also important.
6