Machine learning for gap-filling in greenhouse gas
emissions databases
Luke Cullen
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
lshc3@cam.ac.ukAndrea Marinoni
Department of Physics and Technology
UiT the Arctic University of Norway
Tromsø, Norway
andrea.marinoni@uit.no
Jonathan Cullen
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
jmc99@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions datasets are often incomplete due to inconsistent
reporting and poor transparency. Filling the gaps in these datasets allows for more
accurate targeting of strategies to accelerate the reduction of GHG emissions.
This study evaluates the potential of machine learning methods to automate the
completion of GHG datasets. We use 3 datasets of increasing complexity with
18 different gap-filling methods and provide a guide to which methods are useful
in which circumstances. If few dataset features are available, or the gap consists
only of a missing time step in a record, then simple interpolation is often the
most accurate method and complex models should be avoided. However, if more
features are available and the gap involves non-reporting emitters, then machine
learning methods can be more accurate than simple extrapolation. Furthermore,
the secondary output of feature importance from complex models allows for data
collection prioritisation to accelerate the improvement of datasets. Graph based
methods are particularly scalable due to the ease of updating predictions given new
data and incorporating multimodal data sources. This study can serve as a guide to
the community upon which to base ever more integrated frameworks for automated
detailed GHG emissions estimations, and implementation guidance is available at
https://hackmd.io/@luke-scot/ML-for-GHG-database-completion .
1 Introduction
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions datasets are often incomplete both at facility level ( 1) and at
national level ( 2). Countries and companies are accelerating emissions reduction strategies inline with
the Paris agreement and net-zero objectives ( 3;4;5;6), but incomplete and inaccurate datasets remain
a barrier to effective policy-making ( 7;8;9). Large companies are required to use emissions intensity
factors, provided by government entities or taken from life-cycle assessment databases ( 10;11;12), to
convert their facilities’ activity data to GHG emissions. The 3 main causes of incompleteness at this
level are: companies excluded from reporting regulations, lack of transparency, and non-compliance
(9;13). For companies, the resulting uncertainty, can lead to erroneous net-zero calculations and
missed emissions ( 14). The facility-level data is then aggregated to a national estimate grouped in
to source types and reported yearly by UNFCCC annex I parties. Only 43 out of 198 countries are
considered annex I, accounting for ∼20% of global emissions, while non-Annex I countries have
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2023inconsistent reporting ( 15). National reports are further limited by the standardised breakdown used
by the UNFCCC and the accumulation of these uncertainties can lead to the misunderstanding of
emissions reduction progress and misinformed policy decisions (15).
The most accurate gap-filling solution is to require all emitters to conduct full life-cycle assessments
for their products, but this is not viable at large scale due to the expense and difficulty involved
(16;17). Data fusion, combining multiple data sources has resulted in some country-wide and
industry-wide emissions databases ( 18;19;8;20;21), but these either lack facility-level granularity
or have incomplete coverage of facilities. A second option, which we will explore in this study, is to
improve data coverage and quality by ‘gap-filling’ emissions datasets using the available data to infer
the unavailable data. Inference and machine learning methods have been implemented for improving
process emission estimates in life-cycle assessments ( 22;23;24;25), quantifying uncertainty in
material flow analysis ( 26;27), and data mining for industrial ecology ( 28;29), but have so far
been unsuccessful in capturing the complexity and types of inputs required for full GHG emissions
estimates ( 30;31;32). Gap-filling emissions datasets is a crucial problem where data science may
help if industrial ecologists are equipped with the knowledge of which machine learning techniques
can be used to tackle which problems. This paper seeks to address this gap and respond to the call
for data-driven innovation in the community ( 32;9;33) by introducing 18 classification models
that can be applied to the 3 types of gap-filling problem that we define in section 2. Section 3 will
assess the performance of each model when applied to gap-filling problems across 3 GHG emissions
databases and section 4 will discuss the implications of the results. An interactive guide is available
athttps://hackmd.io/@luke-scot/ML-for-GHG-database-completion . It can serve as a
reference for the community and provide a base for future development of multimodal frameworks
for inferring company-specific emissions estimations, inline with urgent needs from companies and
governments as they attempt to achieve their net-zero targets.
2 Methods
In table 1 we present 3 types of gap addressing increasingly challenging problems in GHG emissions
datasets. Level 1 considers an emitter with some reporting records, but with missing time steps. Level
2 considers an emitter with no reports at any time step, but with properties that are shared with other
emitters in the database. Level 3 considers an emitter with no reports at any time step and with at
least one property that is not shared with any other emitter in the database, for example for a facility
in a country with no reporting facilities at all.
Table 1: Levels of gap filling. Eis the set of emitters and Pis the set of properties of those emitters.
Level Gap composition Set relationship Inference type Typical use case
1 Time stepEtest⊆Etrain
Ptest⊆PtrainSupervised
learning·Inconsistent data reporting
from well regulated facilities.
2 EmitterEtest⊈Etrain
Ptest⊆Ptrain1-D transfer
learning·Non-reporting small facilities.
·Poor transparency.
3Emitter
with unknownsEtest⊈Etrain
Ptest⊈PtrainMultidimensional
transfer learning·UNFCCC gaps, especially
non Annex-I countries.
·Poorly mapped products.
The 3 levels of gap-filling will be considered across 3 datasets which cover a range of typical properties
of GHG emissions databases: UNFCCC ( 2) - national-level with 2 features, ClimateTRACE ( 1) -
facility-level with 6 features, Petrochemical - facility-level with 13 features (see SI1.1 for feature
details). We will discretise gap-filling to a 4-class classification problem with class boundaries set
according to the quantiles of emissions values in each dataset as follows: 0→0.25- low emissions,
0.25→0.5- medium emissions, 0.5→0.75high emissions, 0.75→1very high emissions. For
each gap level, considered for each dataset, we will apply a series of classification techniques and
evaluate their performance using average accuracy and F1score. The models used are assembled
into 5 types: interpolation ( 34), shallow learning models ( 35), ensemble models ( 36), deep learning
models ( 37) and graph representation learning models ( 38). Model structure details can be found
in SI1.2 and cross-validation is used to optimise hyperparameters and prevent overfitting. Finally,
feature importance will be used to establish the most valuable features to collect during future data
gathering and will be evaluated for each model.
23 Results
Figure 1 displays the average accuracy for each model applied to each dataset and for each level
of gap-filling, given a constant 70%-30% train/test set split. For level 1, with missing years in
the UNFCCC dataset, interpolation is the best solution with 97% average accuracy. In datasets
with more input features, decision trees and nearest neighbours perform as well or better than
interpolation at level 1. Deep learning models are not well suited to optimally predict values for
a single emitter and have lower accuracy than as some simpler methods. For level 2 with missing
emitters, interpolation is not the best option for any dataset. Decision trees and random forest methods
are viable solutions across all datasets with 60%-70% accuracy. For the UNFCCC dataset with only
two input features, deep learning is ineffective, but for datasets with more input features, deep learning
and graph representation learning methods perform as well as the best shallow methods. For level 3,
interpolation and shallow models have poor accuracy. For the ClimateTRACE and petrochemical
datasets, deep learning and graph-based models provide the best solutions.
Figure 1: Average accuracy scores. Random guessing would result in 0.25 average accuracy. Trainable
models were run for a maximum of 100 epochs. See SI2.1 for F1-score.
This study used uniform hyperparameter tuning for consistency, but performance for neural network
based models could likely be increased with network structure adjustments and parameter tuning. In
real-life a 70%/30% train/test split may be unrealistic. Further testing showed that average accuracies
for the best performing models in each category reach within 10%, 20% and 20% of their peak
accuracies with just 20% of training data available for levels 1, 2 and 3 respectively. A detailed
figure is available in SI2.2. Figure 2 shows feature importance outputs. Figures 2a and 2b show that
‘Category’ for the UNFCCC and ‘Capacity’ for ClimateTRACE are the most valuable features for
data collection. Figure 2c presents that if data for emitter 0 is not accessible, the best locations to
gain data to improve knowledge of emitter 0’s emissions are emitters 1, 2 and 4.
4 Discussion
Can ML provide an automated solution to GHG emission database completion? This study shows
that ML classifiers can effectively and scalably complete emissions datasets in some cases. However,
different models are appropriate for different types of gap-filling problem and complex models
are not the best solution in many cases. Industrial ecologists and emissions analysts should not
rush to use ML if their problem is not suitable. See SI3 or https://hackmd.io/@luke-scot/
ML-for-GHG-database-completion for a guide for deciding which models should be used in
which circumstances.
3Figure 2: Model explainability representations. Relative feature importance for the decision tree
classifier in the level 2 gap-filling problem are shown for: a) UNFCCC, b) ClimateTRACE. Plot c)
shows the node importance analysis for node 0 using GNNExplainer (39) for the GCN method.
With only 2 features, ML models do not perform well on completing the UNFCCC dataset. If
the UNFCCC database was associated with additional features, this may present an opportunity
to enhance UNFCCC database coverage and target the tightening of UNFCCC regulation to those
parties and features which are the most informative for the overall dataset. This will be the subject of
future work.
Data collection at all emitters will continue to be the most accurate method but this is often not
possible. Feature importance outputs may allow for a targeted approach to reduce the burden on
organisations, such as ClimateTRACE, seeking carbon footprint transparency, as they could maintain
data completeness without explicitly collecting all data points. The ability to infer reliable data across
unobserved emitters may be a useful filter in detecting possible misreporting. If the predicted value is
significantly different to the value reported, this could suggest some verification is required.
The ability to predict emissions categories without imposing any knowledge of the relationship
between input features and output emissions permits easy incorporation of available data sources and
avoids many of the biases involved in manual emissions estimates. In effect, any data source can be
added to a learning-based model which could could open avenues for incorporation of many data
types into a single framework for emissions estimates. Graph-based frameworks may be particularly
helpful for incorporating material flow analysis and life-cycle assessment data due to their graphical
forms. Further afield, a multimodal framework could be a basis for the merging of ‘top-down’ satellite
measurements with ‘bottom-up’ emissions reports, as sought out in the remote sensing community
(40).
Poor performance in scenarios with insufficient input features or high levels of complexity show the
limitations of the techniques in this paper. Furthermore, results are based on 4-class classification
which is too imprecise for many problems, and uncertainty is not quantified. To address these
limitations, our future research will aim to quantify uncertainty across multimodal inputs and output
an uncertainty distribution of values. Initial training time for all models in this study was less than 1
hour on a 16GB RAM computer. Standard neural networks require some level of re-training for each
new data point which may become impractical with a regularly updated system. Graph frameworks
are able to locally incorporate new data without re-training the whole network and may therefore be a
more viable solution for incrementally improving models across large multimodal networks.
In conclusion, ML can be used to automate the completion of greenhouse gas emissions databases
when enough input features are available and feature importance outputs can guide future data
collection. Graph-based frameworks are particularly promising for future multimodal frameworks
that could be used at the intersection of remote sensing and industrial ecology.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was supported by the UKRI Centre for Doctoral Training in Application of Artificial
Intelligence to the study of Environmental Risks [grant number EP/S022961/1].
4References
[1] ClimateTRACE Manufacturing emissions data , 2023. URL :https://climatetrace.org/
downloads .
[2]UNFCCC, “Greenhouse gas inventory data - flexible queries annex I parties,” 2023. URL :
https://di.unfccc.int/flex_annex1 .
[3]J. Rogelj, M. Den Elzen, N. Höhne, T. Fransen, H. Fekete, H. Winkler, R. Schaeffer, F. Sha,
K. Riahi, and M. Meinshausen, “Paris agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep
warming well below 2 c,” Nature , vol. 534, no. 7609, pp. 631–639, 2016.
[4]T. Erb, B. Perciasepe, V . Radulovic, and M. Niland, “Corporate climate commitments: The trend
towards net zero,” in Handbook of Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation , pp. 2985–3018,
Springer, 2022.
[5]K. L. Christiansen, F. Hajdu, E. P. Mollaoglu, A. Andrews, W. Carton, and K. Fischer, ““our
burgers eat carbon”: Investigating the discourses of corporate net-zero commitments,” Environ-
mental Science & Policy , vol. 142, pp. 79–88, 2023.
[6]J. Arnold and P. Toledano, “Corporate net-zero pledges: The bad and the ugly,” Jack Arnold &
Perrine Toledano, Corporate Net-Zero Pledges: The Bad and the Ugly,(2021) Columbia Center
on Sustainable Investment Staff Publications , 2021.
[7]IPCC, “Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-
Delmotte, V ., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y . Chen, L. Goldfarb,
M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield,
O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)].,” Cambridge University Press. , 2021.
[8]EPA, “Flight: Facility level information on greenhouse gases tool,” Environmental Protection
Agency , 2022.
[9]J. Marlowe and A. Clarke, “Carbon accounting: A systematic literature review and directions
for future research,” Green Finance , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 71–87, 2022.
[10] DEFRA, “Guidance on how to measure and report your greenhouse gas emis-
sions,” Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs , 2009. URL:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/69282/pb13309-ghg-guidance-0909011.pdf .
[11] EPA, “Rulemaking notices for ghg reporting,” Greenhouse Gas Reporting
Program (GHGRP) , 2022. URL: https://www.epa.gov/ghgreporting/
rulemaking-notices-ghg-reporting .
[12] Ecoinvent, “Ecoinvent life cycle inventory database,” 2022. URL: https://ecoinvent.org/
the-ecoinvent-database/ .
[13] E. B. de Souza Leao, L. F. M. do Nascimento, J. C. S. de Andrade, and J. A. P. de Oliveira,
“Carbon accounting approaches and reporting gaps in urban emissions: An analysis of the
greenhouse gas inventories and climate action plans in brazilian cities,” Journal of cleaner
production , vol. 245, p. 118930, 2020.
[14] L. Cullen, F. Meng, R. Lupton, and J. Cullen, “Reducing greenhouse gas emissions uncertainties
for chemical production (under consideration),” 2023.
[15] F. Meng, L. Cullen, R. Lupton, and J. Cullen, “Greenhouse gas emissions from global petro-
chemical production (1978-2050) (under consideration),” 2023.
[16] T. Jusselme, E. Rey, and M. Andersen, “An integrative approach for embodied energy: Towards
an lca-based data-driven design method,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , vol. 88,
pp. 123–132, 2018.
[17] T. Potr ˇc Obrecht, M. Röck, E. Hoxha, and A. Passer, “Bim and lca integration: A systematic
literature review,” Sustainability , vol. 12, no. 14, p. 5534, 2020.
5[18] K. Stadler, R. Wood, T. Bulavskaya, C.-J. Södersten, M. Simas, S. Schmidt, A. Usubiaga,
J. Acosta-Fernández, J. Kuenen, M. Bruckner, et al. , “Exiobase 3: Developing a time series of
detailed environmentally extended multi-regional input-output tables,” Journal of Industrial
Ecology , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 502–515, 2018.
[19] S. Pauliuk, N. Heeren, M. M. Hasan, and D. B. Müller, “A general data model for socioeconomic
metabolism and its implementation in an industrial ecology data commons prototype,” Journal
of Industrial Ecology , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1016–1027, 2019.
[20] Climate TRACE, “Bringing radical transparency to global emissions,” 2021. URL: https:
//www.climatetrace.org/ .
[21] K. R. Gurney, J. Liang, R. Patarasuk, Y . Song, J. Huang, and G. Roest, “The vulcan version
3.0 high-resolution fossil fuel co2 emissions for the united states,” Journal of Geophysical
Research: Atmospheres , vol. 125, no. 19, p. e2020JD032974, 2020.
[22] Z. J. Steinmann, A. Venkatesh, M. Hauck, A. M. Schipper, R. Karuppiah, I. J. Laurenzi, and
M. A. Huijbregts, “How to address data gaps in life cycle inventories: a case study on estimating
co2 emissions from coal-fired electricity plants on a global scale,” Environmental science &
technology , vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 5282–5289, 2014.
[23] J. Pascual-González, C. Pozo, G. Guillén-Gosálbez, and L. Jiménez-Esteller, “Combined use of
milp and multi-linear regression to simplify lca studies,” Computers & Chemical Engineering ,
vol. 82, pp. 34–43, 2015.
[24] P. Hou, J. Cai, S. Qu, and M. Xu, “Estimating missing unit process data in life cycle assessment
using a similarity-based approach,” Environmental science & technology , vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 5259–
5267, 2018.
[25] B. Zhao, C. Shuai, P. Hou, S. Qu, and M. Xu, “Estimation of unit process data for life cycle
assessment using a decision tree-based approach,” Environmental science & technology , vol. 55,
no. 12, pp. 8439–8446, 2021.
[26] R. C. Lupton and J. M. Allwood, “Incremental material flow analysis with bayesian inference,”
Journal of Industrial Ecology , vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1352–1364, 2018.
[27] J. Dong, J. Liao, X. Huan, and D. Cooper, “Expert elicitation and data noise learning for material
flow analysis using bayesian inference,” Journal of Industrial Ecology , 2023.
[28] H. Arbabi, M. Lanau, X. Li, G. Meyers, M. Dai, M. Mayfield, and D. Densley Tingley, “A
scalable data collection, characterization, and accounting framework for urban material stocks,”
Journal of Industrial Ecology , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 58–71, 2022.
[29] X. Vilaysouk, S. Saypadith, and S. Hashimoto, “Semisupervised machine learning classification
framework for material intensity parameters of residential buildings,” Journal of Industrial
Ecology , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 72–87, 2022.
[30] M. Algren, W. Fisher, and A. E. Landis, “Machine learning in life cycle assessment,” in Data
Science Applied to Sustainability Analysis , pp. 167–190, Elsevier, 2021.
[31] A. Ghoroghi, Y . Rezgui, I. Petri, and T. Beach, “Advances in application of machine learning to
life cycle assessment: a literature review,” The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment ,
pp. 1–24, 2022.
[32] F. Donati, S. M. Dente, C. Li, X. Vilaysouk, A. Froemelt, R. Nishant, G. Liu, A. Tukker, and
S. Hashimoto, “The future of artificial intelligence in the context of industrial ecology,” Journal
of Industrial Ecology , vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1175–1181, 2022.
[33] R. He, L. Luo, A. Shamsuddin, and Q. Tang, “Corporate carbon accounting: a literature review
of carbon accounting research from the kyoto protocol to the paris agreement,” Accounting &
Finance , vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 261–298, 2022.
[34] E. Süli and D. F. Mayers, An introduction to numerical analysis . Cambridge university press,
2003.
6[35] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V . Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V . Dubourg, et al. , “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” the
Journal of machine Learning research , vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[36] O. Sagi and L. Rokach, “Ensemble learning: A survey,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery , vol. 8, no. 4, p. e1249, 2018.
[37] I. Goodfellow, Y . Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep learning . MIT press, 2016.
[38] W. L. Hamilton, “Graph representation learning,” Synthesis Lectures on Artifical Intelligence
and Machine Learning , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1–159, 2020.
[39] Z. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec, “Gnnexplainer: Generating explana-
tions for graph neural networks,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 32,
2019.
[40] ESA, “Sentinel-1 SAR user guide,” 2021.
7