Detecting Avalanche Deposits using Variational
Autoencoder on Sentinel-1 Satellite Imagery
Saumya Sinha
University of Colorado
Boulder, USASophie Giffard-Roisin *
ISTerre; Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Univ.
Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, IRD, IFSTTAR
Grenoble, France
Fatima Karbou
CNRM-GAME, Météo-France
Grenoble, FranceMichael Deschatres
Irstea, Université Grenoble Alpes
France
Anna Karas
CNRM-GAME, Météo-France
Grenoble, FranceNicolas Eckert
Irstea, Université Grenoble Alpes
France
Cécile Coléou
CNRM-GAME, Météo-France
Grenoble, FranceClaire Monteleoni
University of Colorado
Boulder, USA
Abstract
Avalanche monitoring is a crucial safety challenge, especially in a changing climate.
Remote sensing of avalanche deposits can be very useful to identify avalanche
risk zones and time periods, which can in turn provide insights about the effects
of climate change. In this work, we use Sentinel-1 SAR (synthetic aperture
radar) data on the French Alps for the exceptional winter of 2017-18, with the
goal of automatically detecting avalanche deposits. We address our problem
with an unsupervised learning technique. We treat an avalanche as a rare event,
or an anomaly, and we learn a variational autoencoder, in order to isolate the
anomaly. We then evaluate our method on labeled test data, using an independent
in-situ avalanche inventory as ground truth. Our empirical results show that our
unsupervised method obtains comparable performance to a recent supervised
learning approach that trained a convolutional neural network on an artiﬁcially
balanced version of the same SAR data set along with the corresponding ground-
truth labels. Our unsupervised approach outperforms the standard CNN in terms of
balanced accuracy (63% as compared to 55%). This is a signiﬁcant improvement, as
it allows our method to be used in-situ by climate scientists, where the data is always
very unbalanced (< 2% positives). This is the ﬁrst application of unsupervised deep
learning to detect avalanche deposits.
1 Introduction
Reliable inspection of avalanche debris is important to study the stability of the snowpack and
variability of the avalanche activity, which can aid in avalanche forecasting. Note only can such
Corresponding authors: Saumya Sinha, saumya.sinha@colorado.edu; S. Giffard-Roisin, sophie.giffard-
roisin@mines-saint-etienne.org
NeurIPS Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop (2019), Vancouver, Canada.Figure 1: Evaluation Pipeline for the unsupervised learning framework. V AE is ﬁrst trained only
with negative examples. New positive (containing an avalanche) and negative image patches are
then passed through the learnt network to obtain reconstruction error which are subject to an optimal
threshold for classifying them as avalanche orno avalanche .
research improve human safety in mountainous regions under a changing climate, but it can also
provide insights on climate change. For this work, we have used backscatter coefﬁcients at C-band
from the Sentinel-1A and 1B satellites observing the French Alps every 6 days (active microwave
imaging). Detection methods which isolate debris-like features by contrasting backscatter between a
deposit and surrounding undisturbed snowpack have been used to detect avalanche deposits (Karbou
et al. [2018b]).
While recent work by Karbou et al. [2018b], Waldeland et al. [2018] demonstrates the potential
of Sentinel-1 SAR data for avalanche detection, simple change detection methods (Karbou et al.
[2018a]) fail to capture the complexity of the interaction between the radar signals and the snow.
Few classiﬁcation-based machine learning techniques have been used to tackle the problem on SAR
imagery, e.g., a random forest classiﬁer in Hamar et al. [2016], and a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) in Waldeland et al. [2018], Sinha et al. [2019]. Both Hamar et al. [2016] and Waldeland et al.
[2018] rely on expert labelling and the accuracy of the expert labelling has not been discussed. Unlike
the previous supervised works, in this paper, we take an unsupervised learning approach to train
our model, allowing our techniques to scale to large unbalanced SAR data sets. In order to evaluate
our methods in comparison with related work, we use an avalanche event inventory as ground truth
instead of an expert labelled data. This inventory is maintained by forest rangers from ONF (Ofﬁce
National des Forêts) and stored by Irstea research institute. It includes more than 4000 avalanche
events in the season 2017-2018 across more than 3000 mountain paths (corridors) in the French Alps.
However, the avalanche deposits are only roughly localized.
Avalanche are rare events. As such, there is a need for methods which are able to detect them in
unbalanced datasets, in constrast to recently developed methods that use artiﬁcially balanced data
(Sinha et al. [2019]). Unsupervised learning approaches have recently proven to be efﬁcient for
very unbalanced data, i.e. for rare events (Kiran et al. [2018]). We propose training a Variational
Autoencoder for this task. We evaluate our method in comparison with the supervised method by
Sinha et al. [2019] and a baseline method used in the avalanche detection literature (thresholding by
Karbou et al. [2018a]). From the SAR acquisitions of both current time and 6 days earlier acquisition,
we ﬁrst trained our model to only detect new avalanches. Later, we included past avalanches which
had occurred in the past one month from the current SAR acquisition and did a comparative study
between learning new avalanches vs one month old avalanches.
2 Method
Unsupervised Learning Framework A recent supervised learning CNN-based approach [Sinha
2019] undersamples and throws away a major portion of the dataset in order to keep the positives
and negatives balanced. With only 1.4% positives (new avalanches) in our dataset, we used an
unsupervised approach using a variational autoencoder (V AE) (Kingma and Welling [2014]) as a rare
2event classiﬁer. For every SAR acquisition date, we built a label map where we labeled a corridor
positive if an avalanche was seen between the last acquisition and the current date (6-day window) and
negative if not. We crop 64x64 image patches centered on the lowest elevation part of the corridors
with the zone of deposition. We observe the VV and VH SAR polarizations from the descending
relative orbit 139 and manipulate these polarizations to give us V V,V V
old,V H,V H
oldfollowing
Sinha et al. [2019].
Our V AE only observes negative image patches and learns the underlying characteristics of a non-
avalanche zone. The model struggles when trying to reconstruct an image containing avalanche
(positive). These high differences between the original and reconstructed image give us a measure
of anomalous behavior and help label that image as an outlier or avalanche . We use 4 feature
image channels in our current dataset: V V,V V
old, slope, and angle or orientation (additional
measurements provided by SAR). The training set includes 40,551 images with 39,996 as negative
samples. While feeding data that is only negative to train our V AE requires the supervision to ﬁnd
negative data, more than 98% of our data is negative. Meanwhile, we have also tried training the V AE
on all the data (regardless of label), and found comparable performance.
We observed that vanilla autoencoders struggled to classify the avalanches correctly, thus, we used
V AEs following the recent study by Lu and Xu [2018]. The V AE loss can be decomposed into
reconstruction error (MSE Loss) and Kullback–Leibler (KL) loss. We use a labeled validation set
to tune the threshold on reconstruction error used to classify an avalanche event, i.e., we select the
threshold (a hyper-parameter to our algorithm) which gives the best results on the validation data set.
Experiments on the validation set showed that the best results were obtained by thresholding only the
reconstruction error of an image, as opposed the KL-loss. Fig 1 explains how an image patch fed
into a trained V AE outputs a reconstruction score which is used to classify the image as positive or
outlier based on the optimal threshold. We built a fully convolutional architecture with a latent space
dimension of 300 similar to Lu and Xu [2018] and chose a weight of 0.1 for the KL loss term for
calculating our V AE loss.
3 Evaluation
We select the model performing best on the validation dataset and report its results on the test set
(kept hidden). From Table 1 we can see that, on the "All Alps" data set covering 19 mountain chains,
the unsupervised V AE method outperforms the supervised CNN (Sinha et al. [2019]) in terms of
balanced accuracy (average of recall on both the classes), while achieving comparable F1 score.
Meanwhile it outperforms the baseline method on both metrics. The balanced accuracy score of 63%
shows that we are now better at identifying avalanches.
We also show results on the Haute Maurienne chain, a subset which forms the majority of the All
Alps data set and is one of the most avalanche-prone mountain ranges. We see similar performance
advantages of the V AE method in this region where avalanche monitoring is extremely critical. Our
method not only utilizes most of our data but is more generalized and can be extended to locating
avalanches as "outliers" even in new mountains.
The F1-score, however, is still low (11% in all Alps, 23% in Haute Maurienne). One hypothesis is
that the avalanches might still be visible weeks after, making it difﬁcult to distinguish between past
and new avalanches. In order to test this hypothesis, we show in Table 1 the results of Unsupervised -
V AE* when we set a corridor ’positive’ if an avalanche occurred in the past month and not only 6
days. We can see that the F1-score increases both in all Alps and in the Haute Maurienne.
All Alps Haute Maurienne
Balanced Accuracy F1-score Balanced Accuracy F1-score
Baseline 0.58 0.05 0.58 0.12
Supervised - CNN 0.55 0.12 0.55 0.17
Unsupervised - VAE 0.63 0.11 0.62 0.23
Unsupervised - VAE* 0.62 0.35 0.68 0.66
Table 1: Comparison of our method (Unsupervised - V AE) with the Supervised and Baseline methods
on the test set (7,166 samples). Results are shown on the whole mountain range and Haute Maurienne
(one of the most susceptible mountain zone). Unsupervised - V AE* is the Unsupervised-V AE method
when all avalanches happened in the "past one month" are included (as positive labels).
34 Discussion
This is a ﬁrst quantitative study exploring the potential of applying unsupervised deep learning
methods to detect avalanche deposits and obtain avalanche activity statistics that can be useful in
a real-world setting. While work has been done to learn from the original unbalanced dataset in
Waldeland et al. [2018], they suffer from relying on a manually labelled dataset. Even though we
treated the problem as unsupervised in learning our variational autoencoder, we obtain comparable
results to a CNN method which had advantage of supervised training. Moreover, using only the
negative labels prevented us from overﬁtting over the few positive labels of this dataset. We built our
model with varying number of feature channels and observed that including additional features such
as the slope and orientation of the mountain helped in improving the performance. We also showed
that including all avalanches happened in the past month improved the result.
References
Jarle Bauck Hamar, Arnt-Børre Salberg, and Florina Ardelean. Automatic detection and mapping of
avalanches in sar images. In 2016 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium
(IGARSS) , pages 689–692. IEEE, 2016.
Fatima Karbou, Cécile Coléou, Maxime Lefort, Michael Deschatres, Nicolas Eckert, Rémy Martin,
Gilles Charvet, and Anne Dufour. Monitoring avalanche debris in the french mountains using sar
observations from sentinel-1 satellites. In International snow science workshop (ISSW) , 2018a.
Fatima Karbou, Maxime Lefort, Marie Dumont, Nicolas Eckert, Michael Deschrtres, and Rémy
Martin. Multi-temporal avalanche debris mapping in the french mountains using synthetic aperture
radar observations from sentinel-1. In EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts , volume 20,
page 18024, 2018b.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Stochastic gradient vb and the variational auto-encoder. In
Second International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR , 2014.
B Kiran, Dilip Thomas, and Ranjith Parakkal. An overview of deep learning based methods for
unsupervised and semi-supervised anomaly detection in videos. Journal of Imaging , 4(2):36, 2018.
Yuchen Lu and Peng Xu. Anomaly detection for skin disease images using variational autoencoder.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01349 , 2018.
Saumya Sinha, Sophie Giffard-Roisin, Fatima Karbou, Michaël Deschatres, Anna Karas, Nicolas
Eckert, Cécile Coléou, and Claire Monteleoni. Can Avalanche Deposits be Effectively Detected by
Deep Learning on Sentinel-1 Satellite SAR Images? In Climate Informatics 2019 , Paris, France,
October 2019. URL https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02278230 .
Anders U Waldeland, Jarle Hamar Reksten, and Arnt-Borre Salberg. Avalanche detection in sar
images using deep learning. In IGARSS 2018-2018 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium , pages 2386–2389. IEEE, 2018.
4