Characterization of Industrial Smoke Plumes from
Remote Sensing Data
Michael Mommert
University of St. GallenMario Sigel
Sociovestix Labs Ltd.Marcel Neuhausler
ISS Inc.
Linus Scheibenreif
University of St. GallenDamian Borth
University of St. Gallen
Abstract
The major driver of global warming has been identiﬁed as the anthropogenic release
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from industrial activities. The quantitative
monitoring of these emissions is mandatory to fully understand their effect on
the Earth’s climate and to enforce emission regulations on a large scale. In this
work, we investigate the possibility to detect and quantify industrial smoke plumes
from globally and freely available multi-band image data from ESA’s Sentinel-2
satellites. Using a modiﬁed ResNet-50, we can detect smoke plumes of different
sizes with an accuracy of 94.3%. The model correctly ignores natural clouds and
focuses on those imaging channels that are related to the spectral absorption from
aerosols and water vapor, enabling the localization of smoke. We exploit this
localization ability and train a U-Net segmentation model on a labeled sub-sample
of our data, resulting in an Intersection-over-Union (IoU) metric of 0.608 and an
overall accuracy for the detection of any smoke plume of 94.0%; on average, our
model can reproduce the area covered by smoke in an image to within 5.6%. The
performance of our model is mostly limited by occasional confusion with surface
objects, the inability to identify semi-transparent smoke, and human limitations
to properly identify smoke based on RGB-only images. Nevertheless, our results
enable us to reliably detect and qualitatively estimate the level of smoke activity
in order to monitor activity in industrial plants across the globe. Our data set and
code base are publicly available.
1 Introduction
Global warming poses a major threat to the social and economic stability of human civilization.
Paradoxically, most of the currently observed climate changes are mainly driven by human activities.
The unrestricted consumption of fossil fuels leads to steadily rising levels of atmospheric CO 2and
other greenhouse gases (GHG), resulting in the subsequent trapping of heat in Earth’s atmosphere
and water bodies [see the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Synthesis Report, 2014, for a summary].
The reduction of GHG emissions is mandatory to limit long-term damage to Earth’s climate.
Being able to globally monitor GHG emissions would allow us to (1) obtain a deeper understanding
of its effects on the climate and (2) to enforce environmental protection emission quotas and emission
trading schemes. However, the direct measurement of the amount of GHG emissions is extremely
expensive, especially on large scales. In addition, legal requirements to report industrial emissions
vary signiﬁcantly. A method to globally quantify industrial emissions would improve our picture of
GHG emissions, enable their systematic monitoring, and inform policy makers.
michael.mommert@unisg.ch
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2020.Figure 1: A representative sample of example images. Each column corresponds to a different location; the top
row shows locations when a smoke plume is present (positive class), the bottom row shows the same locations
during the absence of smoke (negative class). Red circles indicates the approximate origin of the plume. Our
data set samples a wide range of seasonal effects, climate zones, land use types, and natural cloud patterns.
This work investigates the possibility to quantify GHG emissions by using industrial smoke plumes
based on satellite imagery as a proxy. The goal of this ongoing project is to establish a pipeline to
monitor the state and level of activity of industrial plants using readily available remote sensing data
in an effort to estimate their GHG emissions in combination with environmental data.
Our contribution2with regard to climate change monitoring is threefold: (1) we compile a large scale
annotated data set of active industrial sites with additional segmentation masks for a subset of these
smoke plumes, (2) we present a modiﬁed ResNet-50 approach able to detect active smoke plumes
with an accuracy of 94.3% and ﬁnally, (3) we utilize a U-Net approach to segment smoke plumes and
measure their areal projections on average within 5.6% of human manual annotations.
2 Related Work
The detection of smoke from remote sensing imaging data in the past has mostly been restricted to
the identiﬁcation of wild ﬁres [see Szapowski & Jensen, 2019, for a review]. A common method
for the detection of wildﬁre smoke uses multi-thresholding of multi-spectral imaging data [e.g.,
Randriambelo et al., 1998], exploiting the spectral characteristics of smoke plumes by hand-crafting
corresponding features. With the rise of machine learning, supervised and unsupervised learning
methods have been implemented to automatically detect wildﬁres and their smoke plumes [Jain et
al., 2020]. Other efforts to characterize smoke plumes use physical dispersion or statistical models
[see Jerrett et al., 2005, for a review], or they utilize ground-based observations from consumer
grade camera systems in combination with algorithmic solutions [Hsu et al., 2018] or deep learning
approaches [Hohberg, 2015, Hsu et al., 2020, Jiao et al., 2020]. While cheap and easy to implement,
such camera systems are severely limited in the wavelength range they can observe in and have to be
deployed for each site individually. Multi-spectral observations from space can monitor large areas
and make use of additional spectral information.
This work focuses on the detection and characterization of smoke plumes from industrial activities
based on Sentinel-2 MultiSpectral Instrument remote sensing data [MSI User Guide, 2020] in an end-
to-end deep learning approach. The advantage of our approach is the combination of multi-spectral
remote sensing data that are available freely and on a global scale with a ﬂexible learning approach
that not only detects smoke, but is able to quantify the amount of activity using a segmentation
model. In contrast to traditional multi-thresholding methods, our deep-learning approach can be
easily adopted to other data sets (other continents, other satellites) without the need for labor-intensive
hand-crafting of the spectral features of smoke and the background.
3 Industrial Site Data Set
We acquire geographic locations of 624 sites from the European Pollutant Release and Transfer
Register [EPRTR, 2020], a pollution reporting entity within the European Union as the foundation
2The code base for this work is available at github.com/HSG-AIML/IndustrialSmokePlumeDetection; the
complete data set is available at zenodo.org.
2Figure 2: Evaluation of our classiﬁcation model. For different examples from our test sub-sample (columns),
we show the true color RGB image (top row), a false color image (center row, see Section 4 for details), and the
activations of Layer2 in our ResNet implementation (bottom row, sharing the same scaling across the row). We
ﬁnd that the location of smoke correlates in most cases with signiﬁcant aerosol and water vapor signals and that
Layer2 activations ﬁre based on these signals, leading to good localization of the smoke.
of our work. For each site, we retrieve all available Sentinel-2 satellite imagery [MSI User Guide,
2020] taken during 2019. Each raster image consists of all 12 spectral-band channels from the
calibrated (bottom-of-atmosphere) Level-2A reﬂectances and is cropped to an edge length of 1,200 m,
corresponding to 120 120 pixels. Low-resolution channels are resampled to the highest available
resolution (10 m/pixel). A representative set of example images is shown in Figure 1.
Each image is manually classiﬁed based on the presence or absence of smoke plumes anywhere in
that image; we further produce segmentation masks for 1,437 random positive images with smoke
plumes. We deﬁne as a smoke plume any opaque or semi-transparent cloud that originates from
the surface; we make no assumptions on the plume’s properties (e.g., its molecular composition or
process of origin) other than it being most likely anthrophogenic. Images (positive and negative) can
include partial cloud coverage, however, images that are fully covered by natural clouds are excluded
from the data set. We note that despite great care, the annotation process is highly subjective due to
the low image resolution (10 m), scene variability caused by weather and illumination differences,
and the fact that human annotation is only based on RGB images and does not consider additional
spectral information present in the data. As a result, surface features such as buildings, ice, snow or
partially occlusion by natural clouds might confuse a human annotator during the labeling process.
The ﬁnal data set includes 21,350 images for 624 different locations with 3,750 positive (a smoke
plume is present) and 17,600 negative (no smoke plume is visible). For each location at least 1 image
(negative only) and up to 96 images (positives and negatives combined) from the time-span during
2019 are available. We split the data into static subsets for training (70%), validation (15%), and
testing (15%) in such a way that data for each location appear only in one of the three subsets.
4 Classiﬁcation: Identiﬁcation of Smoke Plumes
We investigate whether it is possible to reliably detect smoke plumes in our data given the challenges
of natural clouds, ice and snow reﬂections, utilizing a ResNet-50 [He et al., 2016] architecture as
a binary classiﬁer. The architecture is modiﬁed to utilize a 12 multi-band channel (all Sentinel-2
channels) input vector and results in a scalar logit. We use a binary cross-entropy loss function, which
is minimized using stochastic gradient descent with momentum. The training and validation samples
are balanced through duplication of the positive samples. Data augmentation is implemented in the
form of random image mirroring and ﬂipping, random image rotations i90; i2f0;1;2;3g, and
the random cropping of a 90 90 pixel window from each image.
After successful training from scratch we can report an accuracy of 94.3% on the test data. The
confusion matrix is mostly symmetric with typical [TP/TN/FP/FN] ratios of [46.7%, 47.6%, 2.4%,
3.3%] underlining the reliable detection of smoke plumes from the Sentinel-2 satellite data.
To investigate the decision-making process learned by our model, we sum up the gradients in the
model’s ﬁrst convolutional layer (input layer) on a per-input-feature basis and ﬁnd that in most cases
3Figure 3: Evaluation of our segmentation model. For different examples from our test sub-sample (columns),
we show the RGB image (top row), a false color image (center row, see Section 4 for details), and the footprint
of the ground-truth labels (red areas) and predicted labels (green areas). While opaque smoke plumes are easily
identiﬁed by the model (columns 1, 3, 4, and 5), semi-transparent smoke is sometimes missed by the model
(columns 2 and 6). We also ﬁnd that false negatives (column 8) are often related to high-altitude cirrus clouds
and that false positives (column 7) are mainly caused by human mislabeling (see Section 3).
the mean gradients are highest for channels 1 (aerosols), 9 (water vapor), and 11 (Short-Wave Infrared
band 1), which are reasonable since smoke plumes do release small particles and water vapor from
the burning of fossil fuels [see, e.g., Artanto et al., 2012]. In Figure 2, we ﬁnd that the distribution of
signal strength in these channels (center row, false color palette: red = channel 1, green = channel 9,
blue = channel 11) correlates well with the locations of smoke plumes. Our model has learned to
distinguish between smoke plumes and natural clouds (see 6th column in Figure 2). The presence of
high-altitude cirrus clouds seems to impede the detection of smoke plumes (see last column in in
Figure 2). Finally, we ﬁnd that activations in Layer2 (the second bottleneck block in our ResNet-50)
correlate well with the locations of smoke plumes in the image data (see Figure 2, bottom row).
5 Semantic Segmentation: Quantifying Smoke Plumes
We investigate whether it is possible to quantify the amount of smoke present in an image through
semantic segmentation; the measurement of the number of pixels occupied by smoke may be used as
a proxy for the level of industrial activity in this area. We utilize a U-Net [Ronneberger et al., 2015]
implementation in combination with a binary cross entropy loss function and stochastic gradient
descent with momentum to learn the segmentation task. This model is learned on a training data set
comprising 70% of our sample of 1,437 images with manually labeled smoke plumes (see Section 3)
to which we add the same number of negative images (no smoke plumes present). The remaining
labeled images are evenly split into a validation subset and a test subset to which we add negative
examples in the same way. The performance is evaluated using both the accuracy metric, in which
we consider images that contain any amount of smoke positive or negative otherwise, and using the
Intersection-over-Union (IoU, also known as Jaccard index) metric, in which we ignore images that
do not contain smoke labels as those have an ill-deﬁned IoU metric. Our trained model achieves an
accuracy 94.0% and an IoU of 0.608 based on our test sub-sample. Finally, we ﬁnd that on average
94.4% of the area covered by smoke in each positive image is reproduced by our model.
Figure 3 shows example images after running through our segmentation model. We ﬁnd that the
model reliably ﬁnds opaque smoke plumes while it is less reliable in ﬁnding somewhat transparent
smoke plumes; occasionally, surface objects are mistaken as smoke plumes. We ﬁnd a saturation
training sub-sample IoU of 0.7, which we attribute to the model’s issues with semi-transparent
clouds, as well as short-comings in the manual annotation of the data (see Section 3).
We conclude that using our approach we can measure the extent of smoke plumes (on average to
within 5.6% of human performance), which is a prerequisite for estimating actual emission levels
from our results. This will be further investigated in future work in the form of an analysis involving
smoke plume area estimates from our segmentation model and ground-truth activity metrics from
select power plants and other emitters. This process will require to take into account environmental
factors [e.g., as provided by ERA5, 2018].
4References
Artanto, Y ., Jansen, J., Pearson, P. et al., “Pilot-scale evaluation of AMP/PZ to capture CO2 from ﬂue gas of an
Australian brown coal–ﬁred power station”, International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, V olume 20, pg.
189-195 (2014).
European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register, https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/industrial-
reporting-under-the-industrial, accessed Aug 2020.
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, “ERA5 hourly data on single levels from 1979 to
present”, doi:10.24381/cds.adbb2d47
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. 2016 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 770-778 (2016).
Hohberg, Simon P. “Wildﬁre Smoke Detection using Convolutional Neural Networks”, Freie Universität Berlin,
Master Thesis (2015).
Hsu, Yen-Chia, P. Dille, R. Sargent and I. Nourbakhsh. “Industrial Smoke Detection and Visualization.” ArXiv
abs/1809.06263 (2018).
Hsu, Yen-Chia, Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang, et al. “Project RISE: Recognizing Industrial Smoke Emissions.”,
ArXiv, abs/2005.06111 (2020).
“IPCC: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report”. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri
and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 151 pp. (2014).
Jain, P., Sean C P Coogan, Sriram Ganapathi Subramanian et al., “A review of machine learning applications in
wildﬁre science and management.”, ArXiv abs/2003.00646 (2020).
Jerrett, M., Arain, A., Kanaroglou, P. et al. “A review and evaluation of intraurban air pollution exposure
models”, Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology 15, 185-204 (2005).
Jiao, Zhentian, Y . Zhang, Lingxia Mu, Jing Xin, et al., “A YOLOv3-based Learning Strategy for Real-time
UA V-based Forest Fire Detection”, 2020 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC): 4963-4967
(2020).
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa et al., “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library”.
ArXiv, abs/1912.01703 (2019).
Randriambelo, T., Baldy, S., Bessaﬁ, M. “An improved detection and characterization of active ﬁres and smoke
plumes in south-eastern Africa and Madagasca”, Int. J. Remote Sens. 19, 2623–2638 (1998).
Ronneberger, O., P. Fischer and T. Brox. “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation.”
MICCAI (2015).
Sentinel-2 MultiSpectral Instrument User Guide, https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/user-guides/sentinel-2-msi,
accessed Sept 2020.
Szpakowski, D. M. and Jensen, J. L. R.. “A Review of the Applications of Remote Sensing in Fire Ecology”,
Remote. Sens. 11: 2638 (2019).
5