Establishing an Evaluation Metric to
Quantify Climate Change Image Realism
Sharon Zhou
Stanford University
sharonz@cs.stanford.eduAlexandra Luccioni
Mila, Université de Montréal
luccionis@mila.quebecGautier Cosne
Mila, Université de Montréal
cosnegau@mila.quebec
Michael S. Bernstein
Stanford University
msb@cs.stanford.eduYoshua Bengio
Mila, Université de Montréal
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec
Abstract
With success on controlled tasks, generative models are being increasingly applied
to humanitarian applications [ 1,2]. In this paper, we focus on the evaluation
of a conditional generative model that illustrates the consequences of climate
change-induced ﬂooding to encourage public interest and awareness on the issue.
Because metrics for comparing the realism of different modes in a conditional
generative model do not exist, we propose several automated and human-based
methods for evaluation. To do this, we adapt several existing metrics, and assess
the automated metrics against gold standard human evaluation. We ﬁnd that using
Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) with embeddings from an intermediary Inception-
V3 layer that precedes the auxiliary classiﬁer produces results most correlated with
human realism. While insufﬁcient alone to establish a human-correlated automatic
evaluation metric, we believe this work begins to bridge the gap between human
and automated generative evaluation procedures.
1 Introduction
Historically, climate change has been an issue around which it is hard to mobilize collective action,
notably because public awareness and concern around it does not match the magnitude of its threat
to our species and our environment [ 3,4]. One reason for this mismatch is that it is difﬁcult for
people to mentally simulate the complex and probabilistic effects of climate change, which are
often perceived to be distant in terms of time and space [ 5]. Climate communication literature
has asserted that effective communications arises from messages that are emotionally charged and
personally relevant over traditional forms of expert communication such as scientiﬁc reports [ 6],
and that images in particular are key in increasing the awareness and concern regarding the issue
of climate change [ 7]. With this in mind, our project leverages the MUNIT architecture [ 8] to
perform cross-domain multimodal mapping between a street-level image without any ﬂooding to
multiple versions of this image under diverse ﬂood styles, to visually represent the impact of climate
change-induced ﬂooding on a personal level (for results of our model, see Figure 1).
Generative models suffer from a lack of strong evaluation methods for mode comparison. Undeni-
ably, much of the utility of generative models arises from their ability to produce diverse, realistic
outputs, in addition to controlling generation—such as over speciﬁc modes, class labels [ 9], or visual
attributes [ 10]—using conditional constraints. Conditional GANs have two inputs: the conditioning
input (in our case the image of a house which is not ﬂooded) and the random noise Zwhich selects a
equal contribution
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.High Realism
Average Realism
Low Realism
Figure 1: Generated images of ﬂooded scenes from our model on the right (input on the left), spanning
a range of scenes including an urban street, a city view, and a suburban scene. These images also
span a range of performance on human perceptual realism, from highly realistic on top to highly
non-realistic on the bottom.
style, or mode of the conditional distribution. Existing methods for evaluating the quality and diversity
of the generated outputs have strong limitations, and are particularly scarce for conditional models.
Widely used metrics include using heuristic approximations [ 11,12,13] that do not necessarily
correlate with human judgment [ 14], rendering quantitative measurement of progress difﬁcult. We
encountered this problem during the course of the development of our model and in this paper propose
methods for quantifying the realism of modes learned by a generative model, starting with our own
human evaluation. Following this, we compare human and automated approaches for evaluating the
output of multimodal generative models, illustrated in the context of our image generation task.
2 Related Work
To date, there have been two main approaches proposed for generative model evaluation: automated
metrics such as Kernel Inception Distance (KID) [ 15], Inception Score (IS) [ 12] and Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID) [ 13], which all aim to evaluate both the visual quality and sample diversity
of generated samples at the distribution level, and, more recently, human-centered metrics such as
HYPE (Human eYe Perceptual Evaluation) [ 14], which use human evaluators to assess image realism.
Both approaches have their advantages and drawbacks: while automated metrics are cheap and easy
to compute, they need large sets of both generated and real samples in order to produce reliable
scores, which even then are not comparable between different tasks. Human metrics, on the other
hand, may be more representative of human perception, but are more costly to compute and can vary
depending on task design [16, 17].
Recent work has proposed ways of extending existing automated metrics, for instance by using a
modiﬁed version of FID for conditional models [ 18] and sampling heuristics such as the truncation
trick [ 19]. However, these modiﬁcations do not evaluate the visual ﬁdelity between different modes,
only within them in the case of Fréchet Joint Distance [ 18], which limits their application in multi-
modal settings such as ours. Methods for detecting artifacts [ 20] and artiﬁcial ﬁngerprints [ 21] in
2pool 1 pool 2 pre-aux pool 3
FID 0.103 (0.53, 0.153) 0.146 (0.099, 0.193) 0.433 (0.390, 0.476) 0.407 (0.366, 0.448)
KID 0.010 (-0.041, 0.061) 0.034 (-0.015, 0.083) 0.432 (0.389, 0.475) 0.367 (0.322, 0.412)
Table 1: Pearson’s rCorrelation Coefﬁcient . Results of Pearson’s rand bootstrap 95% conﬁdence
intervals between human HYPE-Style scores and all automated methods across different layers of an
ImageNet-pretrained Inception-V3 model, including the three pooling layers ( pool 1 ,pool 2 ,pool 3 )
and the layer preceding the auxiliary classiﬁer ( pre-aux ). Higher values indicate greater correlation.
generated samples also touch on perceptual ﬁdelity, but are either, in the case of artifacts, a subset
of image realism or, in the case of artiﬁcial ﬁngerprints, encompass non-perceptual qualities that
are imperceptible to a human viewer. Therefore, within the scope of our research, we found no
satisfactory automated metric that would allow us to evaluate the realism of the images that we
generated, and we endeavoured to ﬁnd new ways of doing so, which we describe below.
3 Evaluating Image Realism
The research questions that we aim to answer are as follows: (1) What is the most effective way to
evaluate the realism of different styles generated by our model? (2) Can we propose an automated
method that is correlated with human perceptual realism for automatically selecting the best mode
on the ﬂood generation task? We frame this task at the style level: for each given style vector, we
aggregate across multiple samples conditioned on the same mode. This style-level aggregation avoids
evaluating on individual samples, which would produce noisier comparisons. We accomplish this by
adapting the HYPE metric for style-level assessment using crowdsourced human evaluation, and call
our new metric HYPE-Style (see Section 3.1). We compare HYPE-Style against various automated
metrics. These metrics adapt FID and KID to the style comparison task. For each metric, we also
experiment with different Inception layers.
We analyze Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient rbetween each proposed automated style ranking
method and HYPE-Style to identify the method most correlated with human perceptual realism.
The measure rhas support [-1,1], where values of 1 and -1 indicate strong positive and negative
correlation, respectively, while values around zero indicate low correlation. An rof 1 is the maximum
performance achievable on this metric. We also compute the 95% bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals
(CIs) on rusing 25 replicates in order to determine the separability of the scores. For each replicate
i, we compute HYPE-Style and an automated score using images sampled with replacement, from
which we calculate ri. We report the median rvalues, with 95% bootstrap CIs.
3.1 HYPE-Style: Human Evaluation
In order to establish a human gold standard, we evaluated 500 image-style combinations drawn from
our model, based on 25 input images of diverse locations and building types (houses, farms, streets,
cities), each with 20 styles generated by our model. To establish the human baseline, we presented 50
images to each of our human evaluators: 25 real ﬂooded images and 25 generated images. Following
prior work, evaluators were calibrated and ﬁltered by this tutorial of half real and half generated
images, and were given unlimited time to label an image real or fake [ 14]. For each image, we
compute the average error rate, which corresponds to the proportion of human evaluators who judged
the image as real. Higher values indicate more realistic images.
We make several modiﬁcations to prior work in order to enable intra-style comparisons in conditional
generation. Instead of randomly sampling across all generated images, we constrain the procedure in
two ways: (1) we require that each style and image combination is evaluated multiple times, so we
have comparisons between styles yet still within a given image, and (2) we ensure that evaluators do
not see multiple styles generated from a given input image, as this visual redundancy would reveal
that they were generated. These two adaptations increase the number of evaluators needed for this
task, as evaluators are restrained to a limited set of images sans input redundancy, while still needed
to evaluate across different styles for given input images.
We also diverge from HYPE when calculating scores, aggregating images by style into groups and
computing the micro-average of all human evaluator labels within each group. Speciﬁcally, for each
stylesand image x, we have multiple human labels ls
xmarked either “real" (1) and “generated" (0)
3based on human judgments of its realism and we compute HYPE-Style =P
ils
ifor each style s,
summing across images of that particular style. Thus, higher scores on generated images indicate
higher fool rates and seem more realistic to humans on average. We use these style-level scores as
the human baseline, where higher scores indicate more realistic styles, which we call HYPE-Style .
This human evaluation, while more precise and reliable, is expensive and time-consuming to perform
per style: we thus set out to ﬁnd automated methods that are most correlated with human judgment to
assess a much larger set of styles than is cost-efﬁcient for HYPE-Style.
3.2 Automated Style Ranking Methods
We adapted FID and KID to compute distances between real and generated distributions within
a single style, and use these as the style scores. We also experimented with different layers of
Inception-V3 trained on ImageNet [ 12] that span low-level (pool 1) to high-level (pool 3) features.
For our evaluation, we included features from all three pooling layers, as well as the feature map
before the auxiliary classiﬁer (pre-aux). In total, we evaluate eight automated methods {FID, KID}
{pool 1, pool 2, pre-aux, pool 3}.
As shown in Table 1, both FID and KID using pre-aux embeddings exceed the other metrics in
correlating with human HYPE-Style scores, with a moderate correlation ( r=0.433 and r=0.432,
respectively). Following these metrics, in third rank order is: (2) FID using pool 3 embeddings
(r=0.407), or the original FID score, then (2) KID using pool 3 embeddings ( r=0.367). Finally, (3)
FID and KID using pool 2 and pool 1 layers exhibit extremely weak correlation with r <0.2. When
comparing performance between layers, KID and FID track each other, with pre-aux embeddings
coming ﬁrst, followed by pool 3, pool 2, and lastly pool 1.
While the original FID paper proposed to use features from the third and last 2048-dimensional
pooling layer (pool 3) of an ImageNet-pretrained Inception-v3 network [ 13], we ﬁnd empirically
that the 768-dimensional Inception-v3 layer just preceding the auxiliary classiﬁer head (pre-aux)
outperforms the pool 3 layer and other earlier pooling layers {pool 1, pool 2}. Intuitively, the pre-aux
layer is the most feature-rich layer that is still regularized by the gradients from the auxiliary classiﬁer.
This regularization would encourage the layer to encode more general features that are less overﬁt
to ImageNet, which is more useful on this task with a different domain than ImageNet—ImageNet
has, in fact, also been criticized for generalizing poorly to test sets in its own domain [ 22]. We found
that the choice of the pre-aux layer over pool 3 and others is consistent across FID and KID, with
scores of 0.433 and 0.432 on the pre-aux layer against 0.407 and 0.367 on pool 3 for FID and KID
respectively. As a note, the difference between the FID layers’ rvalues are not fully separable based
on their 95% bootstrapped CIs.
4 Discussion and Future Work
In this paper, we contribute a human evaluation metric for evaluating different styles on a generative
model. We also evaluate eight different automated methods, ﬁnding that using Inception embeddings
preceding the auxiliary classiﬁer correlates more with human perception on this task than widely
used methods using the last pooling layer. Our work is motivated largely by the dearth of available,
reliable evaluation metrics for quantifying the progress of this task.
While none of the automated approaches evaluated comes sufﬁciently close to HYPE-Style for
standalone use, our work still constitutes an initial foray into evaluating style-level attributes of
multimodal cross-domain mapping, an area where it remains difﬁcult to use mainstream automated
evaluation metrics out of the box. As future work, we plan to both improve the realism of our
generative model and explore better methods for evaluation. For instance, the performance of the
pre-auxiliary classiﬁer embeddings suggest that we are operating outside the domain of ImageNet,
and from this insight, we are inclined to leverage other embedding spaces, e.g. the Mapillary or
Cityscapes datasets [ 23,24], which could provide more suitable street-level scenery features that is
similar to ours. The ultimate vision of this work is to create an ML architecture which, given an image
from Google StreetView [ 25] based on a user-chosen location, is able to generate the most realistic
image of climate-change induced extreme weather phenomena, given the contextual characteristics
of that given image. While representing ﬂooding realistically is the ﬁrst step to achieve this goal,
we later aim to represent other catastrophic events that are being bolstered by climate change (e.g.
tropical cyclones or wildﬁres) using a similar approach.
4References
[1]D. Nie, R. Trullo, J. Lian, C. Petitjean, S. Ruan, Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “Medical image
synthesis with context-aware generative adversarial networks,” in International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pp. 417–425, Springer, 2017.
[2]P. Yanardag, I. Rahwan, M. Garcia Herranz, C. Fabian, Z. Rahwan, N. Obradovich, A. Dubey,
and M. Cebrian, “Deep empathy,” 2017.
[3]N. Pidgeon, “Climate change risk perception and communication: addressing a critical mo-
ment?,” Risk Analysis: An International Journal , vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 951–956, 2012.
[4]E. U. Weber and P. C. Stern, “Public understanding of climate change in the united states.,”
American Psychologist , vol. 66, no. 4, p. 315, 2011.
[5]S. J. O’Neill and M. Hulme, “An iconic approach for representing climate change,” Global
Environmental Change , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 402–410, 2009.
[6]P. Lujala, H. Lein, and J. K. Rød, “Climate change, natural hazards, and risk perception: the role
of proximity and personal experience,” Local Environment , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 489–509, 2015.
[7]S. J. O’Neill, M. Boykoff, S. Niemeyer, and S. A. Day, “On the use of imagery for climate
change engagement,” Global environmental change , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 413–421, 2013.
[8]X. Huang, M.-Y . Liu, S. Belongie, and J. Kautz, “Multimodal unsupervised image-to-image
translation,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pp. 172–
189, 2018.
[9]M. Mirza and S. Osindero, “Conditional generative adversarial nets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1411.1784 , 2014.
[10] X. Yan, J. Yang, K. Sohn, and H. Lee, “Attribute2image: Conditional image generation from
visual attributes,” in European Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 776–791, Springer, 2016.
[11] T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila, “A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
[12] T. Salimans, I. Goodfellow, W. Zaremba, V . Cheung, A. Radford, and X. Chen, “Improved
techniques for training gans,” in Advances in neural information processing systems , pp. 2234–
2242, 2016.
[13] M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter, “Gans trained by a two
time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 6626–6637, 2017.
[14] S. Zhou, M. Gordon, R. Krishna, A. Narcomey, D. Morina, and M. S. Bernstein, “Hype: Human
eye perceptual evaluation of generative models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.01121 , 2019.
[15] M. Binkowski, D. J. Sutherland, M. Arbel, and A. Gretton, “Demystifying mmd gans,” ArXiv ,
vol. abs/1801.01401, 2018.
[16] J. Le, A. Edmonds, V . Hester, and L. Biewald, “Ensuring quality in crowdsourced search
relevance evaluation: The effects of training question distribution,” in SIGIR 2010 workshop on
crowdsourcing for search evaluation , vol. 2126, pp. 22–32, 2010.
[17] T. Mitra, C. J. Hutto, and E. Gilbert, “Comparing person-and process-centric strategies for
obtaining quality data on amazon mechanical turk,” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp. 1345–1354, ACM, 2015.
[18] T. DeVries, A. Romero, L. Pineda, G. W. Taylor, and M. Drozdzal, “On the evaluation of
conditional gans,” CoRR , vol. abs/1907.08175, 2019.
[19] A. Brock, J. Donahue, and K. Simonyan, “Large scale gan training for high ﬁdelity natural
image synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096 , 2018.
5[20] D. Bau, J.-Y . Zhu, H. Strobelt, B. Zhou, J. B. Tenenbaum, W. T. Freeman, and A. Torralba,
“Gan dissection: Visualizing and understanding generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.10597 , 2018.
[21] F. Marra, D. Gragnaniello, L. Verdoliva, and G. Poggi, “Do gans leave artiﬁcial ﬁngerprints?,” in
2019 IEEE Conference on Multimedia Information Processing and Retrieval (MIPR) , pp. 506–
511, IEEE, 2019.
[22] B. Recht, R. Roelofs, L. Schmidt, and V . Shankar, “Do imagenet classiﬁers generalize to
imagenet?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10811 , 2019.
[23] G. Neuhold, T. Ollmann, S. Rota Bulo, and P. Kontschieder, “The mapillary vistas dataset for
semantic understanding of street scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision , pp. 4990–4999, 2017.
[24] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Benenson, U. Franke, S. Roth,
and B. Schiele, “The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 3213–3223, 2016.
[25] D. Anguelov, C. Dulong, D. Filip, C. Frueh, S. Lafon, R. Lyon, A. Ogale, L. Vincent, and
J. Weaver, “Google street view: Capturing the world at street level,” Computer , vol. 43, no. 6,
pp. 32–38, 2010.
6