On the use of Deep Generative Models for “Perfect”
Prognosis Climate Downscaling
Jose González-Abad
Santander Meteorology Group and
Advanced Computing and e-Science Group
Institute of Physics of Cantabria (CSIC-UC)
Santander, Spain
gonzabad@ifca.unican.esJorge Baño-Medina
Santander Meterology Group
Institute of Physics of Cantabria (CSIC-UC)
Santander, Spain
bmedina@ifca.unican.es
Ignacio Heredia Cachá
Advanced Computing and e-Science Group
Institute of Physics of Cantabria (CSIC-UC)
Santander, Spain
iheredia@ifca.unican.es
Abstract
Deep Learning has recently emerged as a “perfect” prognosis downscaling tech-
nique to compute high-resolution ﬁelds from large-scale coarse atmospheric data.
Despite their promising results to reproduce the observed local variability, they are
based on the estimation of independent distributions at each location, which leads
to deﬁcient spatial structures, especially when downscaling precipitation. This
study proposes the use of generative models to improve the spatial consistency
of the high-resolution ﬁelds, very demanded by some sectoral applications (e.g.,
hydrology) to tackle climate change.
1 Motivations for generative models in “perfect” prognosis downscaling
Global Climate Models (GCMs) are the main tools used nowadays to study the evolution of climate
at different time-scales. They numerically solve a set of equations describing the dynamics of the
climate system over a three-dimensional grid (latitude-longitude-height). In climate change modeling,
these models are utilized to produce possible future pathways of the climate system based on different
natural and anthropogenic forcings. However, due to computational limitations these models present
a coarse spatial resolution —between 1and3,— which leads to a misrepresentation of important
phenomena occurring at ﬁner scales. The generation of high-resolution climate projections is crucial
for important socio-economic activities (e.g., the energy industry), and they are routinely used to
elaborate mitigation and adaptation politics to climate change at a regional scale.
Statistical Downscaling (SD) is used to bridge the scale-gap between the coarse model outputs and
the local-scale by learning empirical relationships between a set of large-scale variables (predictors)
and the regional variable of interest (predictands) based on large simulated/observational historical
data records [ 1]. In this study we focus on a speciﬁc type of SD, named the “Perfect” Prognosis
(PP) approach. PP downscaling leans on observational datasets to learn empirical relationships
linking the predictors and the predictands. For the former, reanalysis data —a global dataset which
combines observations with short-range forecasts through data assimilation,— is typically used,
whilst for the latter either high-resolution grids or station-scale records can be employed. Once
the relationship is established in these “perfect” conditions, we feed the model/algorithm with the
equivalent GCM predictor variables to obtain high-resolution climate projections. A wide variety of
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2021.statistical techniques have been deployed to establish these links, such as (generalized) linear models
[2], support vector machines [ 3], random forests [ 4], classical neural networks [ 5], and more recently
deep learning (DL). In particular, DL has recently emerged as a promising PP technique, showing
capabilities to reproduce the observed local climate [ 6,7,8], whilst showing plausible climate
change projections of precipitation and temperature ﬁelds over Europe [ 9]. Nonetheless, currently
the regression-based nature of most of the existing PP methods, leads to an underestimation of the
extremes when the predictors lack from sufﬁcient informative power —i.e., given a particular predictor
conﬁguration there are many possible predictand situations,— since they output the conditional mean
[10]. To account for the uncertainty describing the possible extremes is crucial for some activities, and
the community has driven its attention to probabilistic regression-based modeling. The probabilistic
models used mostly estimate the parameters of selected probability distributions conditioned to
the large-scale atmospheric situation. The choice of the distribution depends on the variable of
interest to be modeled —for instance, the temperature follows a Gaussian distribution, whilst wind
or precipitation ﬁelds present a heavy-tailed structure which better ﬁts with Gamma, Poisson or
log-normal density functions,— and the regression-based models are trained to optimize the negative
log-likelihood of the selected distribution at each site [ 5,7,11,12,13]. To model the spatial
dependencies among sites, ideally we would estimate multivariate distributions representing the
whole predictand domain, instead of predicting independent probability functions at each predictand
site. Nonetheless, this was in practice computationally intractable, and very few procedures aimed to
downscale over low-dimensional predictand spaces have been successfully deployed [14, 15, 16].
Recently, deep generative models have been developed that seek to approximate high-dimensional
distributions through DL topologies. Based on previous merits in other disciplines, such as image-
super-resolution (see e.g., [ 17,18]), some studies have searched for an analogy between this task
and downscaling, deploying Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN, [ 19,20]) to obtain stochastic
samples of high-resolution precipitation and temperature ﬁelds conditioned to their counterpart
low-resolution ones. Despite these ﬁrst studies are far from the PP approach, —since they lean on
surface variables in their predictor set, which are not well represented by GCMs (see [ 1,21] for
guidelines/details on PP),— they show the potential of generative models to attain impressive levels
of spatial structure in their stochastic downscaled predictions. Following this idea, we state that these
topologies may provide a tractable alternative to model multivariate conditional distributions over
high-dimensional domains in a PP setting, providing stochastic and spatially consistent downscaled
ﬁelds very demanded by some sectoral applications for climate impact studies. To prove the potential
of this type of DL topologies for PP-based downscaling, we show in the next section a use-case where
Conditional Variational Auto-Encoders (CV AE) are deployed to produce stochastic high-resolution
precipitation ﬁelds over Europe.
2 A downscaling case study over Europe with CVAE
We develop a simple use-case1which seeks to illustrate the promising capabilities of CV AE topologies
to generate spatially consistent stochastic downscaled ﬁelds, especially as compared to the recent
state-of-the-art PP DL-based topologies, which are based on the estimation of conditional Bernoulli-
Gamma distributions at each predictand site (we refer the reader to [ 7] for more details). To this
aim, we deploy the CV AE in the same conditions than [ 7], which builds on the validation framework
proposed in the COST action V ALUE [ 22]. V ALUE proposes the use of ERA-Interim [ 23] reanalysis
variables as predictors —trimmed to an horizontal resolution of 2o,— and the regular gridded 0:5o
E-OBS dataset [ 24] as predictand. For the predictor set we use ﬁve thermodynamical variables
(geopotential height, zonal and meridional wind, temperature, and speciﬁc humidity) at four different
vertical levels (1000, 850, 700 and 500 hPa), whilst as predictand we use the daily accumulated
precipitation over Europe. The models are trained on the period 1979-2002 and tested on 2003-2008.
Figure 1 shows the scheme of the CV AE proposed. This models builds on three different neural
networks —an embedding network, an encoder and a decoder,— to produce stochastic samples of
precipitation by sampling from a latent distribution which represents the complex interactions between
predictors and predictands. During training, the embedding network transforms the high-dimensional
predictorsXto a low-dimensional array zx. This array is then stacked with the high-resolution
predictand ﬁelds Yto feed the encoder network. The encoder outputs the parameters of a Gaussian
distribution (i.e., the mean and the standard deviation ), which encodes the spatial dependencies
1The code of the use-case is available at https://github.com/jgonzalezab/CV AE-PP-Downscaling
2Embedding 
NN
EncoderDecoder
Large scale 
atmospheric data
Univariate distribution samples  (CNN1)
inference path
training paths
Multivariate distribution samples  (CVAE)
Baño-Medina et al. (2021)Local value of interest 
(true value)conditional branch
sampling
051015202530mm/dayFigure 1: CV AE model architecture. Red lines represent the path followed by the model in the
inference phase, during training both paths (green and red lines) are covered. At the bottom, a
comparison between three different downscaled ﬁelds sampled from CV AE and CNN1 models,
alongside the actual observation for 19/02/2004.
between both predictor and predictand ﬁelds. During both training and inference phases, stochastic
realizations zsampled from this latent distribution are stacked with the low-dimensional predictor’s
embedding zx. This is used to feed the decoder network, which outputs the precipitation values bY
at each E-OBS predictand site considered. Therefore, different samples bYconditioned on the same
large-scale atmospheric situation Xcan be generated by sampling different vectors zfrom the latent
distribution (see the three maps obtained for a particular day). We refer the reader to [ 25] for more
details on CV AE.
For the sake of comparison, we select CNN1, which was one of the models that ranked ﬁrst in [ 7], as
an example of univariate model and compare its stochastic downscaled ﬁelds with those of CV AE. It
can be seen how CNN1 ﬁelds present a spotty structure, characteristic of the sampling performed
over the independent Bernoulli-Gamma distributions at each E-OBS site. In contrast, CV AE does not
suffer from this problem improving the spatial consistency of the downscaled ﬁelds, as can be seen in
the smoothness of the predictions.
3 Pathway of generative models to tackle climate change
Overall, we have showed the ability of CV AEs to produce spatially consistent stochastic ﬁelds in PP
setups on a use-case over Europe. The generation of these high-resolution ﬁelds through generative
models may foster the use of this type of downscaling into climate impact studies, since their products
are very demanded by different sectors (e.g., agriculture, hydrology) to tackle climate change. In this
3line there are several challenges to address. For instance further research is needed in the evaluation
of these models on aspects such as temporal consistency, and reproducibility of extremes. Also, in
order to apply them to climate change projections, a study of its extrapolation capabilities is also
required. The CV AE model developed here is a ﬁrst approach, but further tuning this architecture
may translate in improvements in the generated downscaled ﬁelds. For example, [ 26,27] propose the
use of normalizing ﬂows to generate more complex latent distributions which could help capturing
the complex non-linearities of the distribution of precipitation ﬁelds. Finally, the DL ecosystem offers
a wide catalog of additional topologies which are of interest for PP downscaling (e.g., Conditional
GANs [28]).
Acknowledgements. The authors acknowledge support from Universidad de Cantabria and Con-
sejería de Universidades, Igualdad, Cultura y Deporte del Gobierno de Cantabria via the “instru-
mentación y ciencia de datos para sondear la naturaleza del universo” project. J. González-Abad
would also like to acknowledge the support of the funding from the Spanish Agencia Estatal de
Investigación through the Unidad de Excelencia María de Maeztu with reference MDM-2017-0765.
References
[1]Douglas Maraun and Martin Widmann. Statistical downscaling and bias correction for climate
research . Cambridge University Press, 2018.
[2]José Manuel Gutiérrez, Douglas Maraun, Martin Widmann, Radan Huth, Elke Hertig, Rasmus
Benestad, Ole Rössler, Joanna Wibig, Renate Wilcke, Sven Kotlarski, et al. An intercomparison
of a large ensemble of statistical downscaling methods over europe: Results from the value
perfect predictor cross-validation experiment. International journal of climatology , 39(9):3750–
3785, 2019.
[3]Shien-Tsung Chen, Pao-Shan Yu, and Yi-Hsuan Tang. Statistical downscaling of daily pre-
cipitation using support vector machines and multivariate analysis. Journal of hydrology ,
385(1-4):13–22, 2010.
[4]Bo Pang, Jiajia Yue, Gang Zhao, and Zongxue Xu. Statistical downscaling of temperature with
the random forest model. Advances in Meteorology , 2017, 2017.
[5]Peter M Williams. Modelling seasonality and trends in daily rainfall data. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pages 985–991, 1998.
[6]Baoxiang Pan, Kuolin Hsu, Amir AghaKouchak, and Soroosh Sorooshian. Improving precipita-
tion estimation using convolutional neural network. Water Resources Research , 55(3):2301–
2321, 2019.
[7]Jorge Baño-Medina, Rodrigo Manzanas, and José Manuel Gutiérrez. Conﬁguration and inter-
comparison of deep learning neural models for statistical downscaling. Geoscientiﬁc Model
Development , 13(4):2109–2124, 2020.
[8]Lei Sun and Yufeng Lan. Statistical downscaling of daily temperature and precipitation over
china using deep learning neural models: Localization and comparison with other methods.
International Journal of Climatology , 41(2):1128–1147, 2021.
[9]Jorge Baño-Medina, Rodrigo Manzanas, and José Manuel Gutiérrez. On the suitability of deep
convolutional neural networks for continental-wide downscaling of climate change projections.
Climate Dynamics , pages 1–11, 2021.
[10] SC Pryor and JT Schoof. Differential credibility assessment for statistical downscaling. Journal
of Applied Meteorology and Climatology , 59(8):1333–1349, 2020.
[11] Julie Carreau and Mathieu Vrac. Stochastic downscaling of precipitation with neural network
conditional mixture models. Water Resources Research , 47(10), 2011.
[12] Anna Vaughan, Nicholas D Lane, and Michael Herzog. Multivariate climate downscaling with
latent neural processes. 2021.
4[13] Anna Vaughan, Will Tebbutt, J Scott Hosking, and Richard E Turner. Convolutional conditional
neural processes for local climate downscaling. Geoscientiﬁc Model Development Discussions ,
pages 1–25, 2021.
[14] Alex J Cannon. Probabilistic multisite precipitation downscaling by an expanded bernoulli–
gamma density network. Journal of Hydrometeorology , 9(6):1284–1300, 2008.
[15] Mohamed Ali Ben Alaya, Fateh Chebana, and Taha BMJ Ouarda. Probabilistic gaussian
copula regression model for multisite and multivariable downscaling. Journal of Climate ,
27(9):3331–3347, 2014.
[16] MA Ben Alaya, Taha BMJ Ouarda, and Fateh Chebana. Non-gaussian spatiotemporal simulation
of multisite daily precipitation: downscaling framework. Climate dynamics , 50(1):1–15, 2018.
[17] Chao Dong, Chen Change Loy, Kaiming He, and Xiaoou Tang. Image super-resolution using
deep convolutional networks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,
38(2):295–307, 2015.
[18] Zhen Li, Jinglei Yang, Zheng Liu, Xiaomin Yang, Gwanggil Jeon, and Wei Wu. Feedback
network for image super-resolution. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3867–3876, 2019.
[19] Jussi Leinonen, Daniele Nerini, and Alexis Berne. Stochastic super-resolution for downscaling
time-evolving atmospheric ﬁelds with a generative adversarial network. IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 2020.
[20] Bastien François, Soulivanh Thao, and Mathieu Vrac. Adjusting spatial dependence of climate
model outputs with cycle-consistent adversarial networks. Climate Dynamics , pages 1–31,
2021.
[21] Douglas Maraun, Martin Widmann, and José M Gutiérrez. Statistical downscaling skill under
present climate conditions: A synthesis of the value perfect predictor experiment. International
Journal of Climatology , 39(9):3692–3703, 2019.
[22] Douglas Maraun, Martin Widmann, José M Gutiérrez, Sven Kotlarski, Richard E Chandler,
Elke Hertig, Joanna Wibig, Radan Huth, and Renate AI Wilcke. Value: A framework to validate
downscaling approaches for climate change studies. Earth’s Future , 3(1):1–14, 2015.
[23] Dick P Dee, S M Uppala, AJ Simmons, Paul Berrisford, P Poli, S Kobayashi, U Andrae,
MA Balmaseda, G Balsamo, d P Bauer, et al. The era-interim reanalysis: Conﬁguration and
performance of the data assimilation system. Quarterly Journal of the royal meteorological
society , 137(656):553–597, 2011.
[24] Richard C. Cornes, Gerard van der Schrier, Else J. M. van den Besselaar, and Philip D. Jones.
An Ensemble Version of the E-OBS Temperature and Precipitation Data Sets. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres , 123(17):9391–9409, 2018.
[25] Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation
using deep conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems ,
28:3483–3491, 2015.
[26] Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing ﬂows. In
International conference on machine learning , pages 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015.
[27] Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Rafal Jozefowicz, Xi Chen, Ilya Sutskever, and Max Welling.
Improved variational inference with inverse autoregressive ﬂow. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 29:4743–4751, 2016.
[28] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. Conditional generative adversarial nets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1411.1784 , 2014.
5