Mamba MethaneMapper: State Space Model for
Methane Detection from Hyperspectral Imagery
Satish Kumar1
satishkumar@ucsb.eduASM Iftekhar1
iftekhar@ucsb.eduBowen Zhang1
bowen68@ucsb.edu
Kaikai Liu1
kaikailiu@ucsb.edu
1University of California Santa BarbaraMehan Jayasuriya
mehan@mozillafoundation.org
Mozilla Foundation
Abstract
Methane ( CH 4) is the chief contributor to global climate change. Recent advance-
ments in AI-based image processing have paved the way for innovative approaches
for the detection of methane using hyperspectral imagery. Existing methods, while
effective, often come with high computational demands and associated costs that
can limit their practical applications. Addressing these limitations, we propose the
Mamba MethaneMapper (MMM), a cost-effective and efficient AI-driven solution
designed to enhance methane detection capabilities in hyperspectral images. MMM
will incorporate two key innovations that collectively improve performance while
managing costs. First, we will utilize a gpu-aware state-space encoder, which opti-
mizes the computational resources and efficiency of the system. Second, MMM
will use an environment-sensitive module to prioritize image regions likely contain-
ing methane emissions, which are then analyzed by our efficient Mamba algorithm.
This selective approach not only improves the accuracy of methane detection but
also significantly reduces unnecessary computations and memory consumption.
1 Introduction
We address the challenge of detecting and pinpointing methane (CH 4) plumes using multispectral
and hyperspectral imaging data as an object detection and segmentation problem. Identifying and
locating potential methane emission hot spots is a crucial initial step in mitigating global warming
caused by greenhouse gases. Methane is responsible for approximately 20% of the global warming
effect attributed to greenhouse gases [ 9]. Its Global Warming Potential (GWP) is 86 times greater
than that of carbon dioxide (CO 2) over a 20-year timeframe [ 17]. This underscores the urgent need
to monitor and reduce methane emissions. Methane persists in the atmosphere for an average of 7.9
years [ 16], and its atmospheric concentration has been rising steadily since the industrial revolution
[1]. While the annual increase in methane levels slowed between 1999 and 2006, it began to rise
again in 2007 [18].
While methane emission has many sources, the ones of particular interest are those from oil and
natural gas industries. According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency report,
methane emissions from these industries accounts to 84 million tons per year [ 7,13]. Current efforts
to detect these sources mostly depend on aerial imagery. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) has
conducted thousands of aerial surveys in the last decade to collect data using an airborne sensor
A VIRIS-NG [ 8]. Several methods have been proposed to detect potential emission sites from such
imagery, for example, see [ 19,20,2,12,14,10]. Most existing methods exhibit high sensitivity to
background context and variations in land-cover types, which leads to a substantial number of false
positives. These false detections typically require considerable intervention from domain experts
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2024.Figure 1: Overview of the MMM architecture: The hyperspectral image input will be processed
through a feature selector block. A band-pass filter will isolate the salient bands within the RGB
(400-700nm) and SWIR (2000-2500nm) channels. These isolated channels will be fed into the
backbone feature extractor. The spectral filter will identify potential methane regions, which will be
used as masks to select specific spatial locations in the extracted features. These features will then be
encoded by the state-space encoder and decoded by the hyperspectral decoder to predict bounding
boxes and segmentation masks for methane detection. FNN and S6 refer as the feed-forward network
and the Mamba state-space block, respectively.
to correct. Kumar et al. [ 14,12,10] addressed these limitations by developing a neural network
architecture capable of modeling background distributions to suppress false positives. Their work
introduced a hyperspectral transformer model, guided by queries containing prior information about
methane hotspots, facilitating accurate feature extraction and achieving state-of-the-art detection
performance.
However, despite the accuracy of these models, they rely on transformer architecture with attention
mechanisms that are computationally inefficient [ 3,11,15]. Attention layers introduce significant
overhead in both computational complexity and inference time. To mitigate these inefficiencies, we
propose Mamba MethaneMapper (MMM), a novel framework that replaces the attention mechanism
in the transformer architectures with a Mamba-S6 [ 3] state space block. This block reduces the
quadratic computational complexity of the attention mechanisms to linear complexity. However,
due to the nature of the hyperspectral data just replacing attention mechanism will not render to an
efficient architecture[ 22]. Therefore, we propose an environment dependent selection strategy in the
form of feature selector block.
In summary, MMM will incorporate two primary innovative modules. First, it will integrate a GPU-
optimized state-space encoder [ 3], which is designed to maximize computational efficiency. Second,
MMM will employ an environment-adaptive feature selector to select regions that are likely to contain
methane emissions. These prioritized regions will then be processed the mentioned encoder, reducing
unnecessary computations and memory usage.
2 Mamba MethaneMapper Architecture
Data Overview For initial development and preliminary exploration, we will use the Methane
Hot Spots (MHS) dataset [ 10]. We will train and test on the subset of the dataset from 2015.
This subset includes flightlines from the Four-Corner (New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, and Colorado)
region in United States of America. The dataset contains approximately 114 flightlines with point
source emissions. We excluded the diffused emission source for the initial experiments. A VIRIS-
NG hyperspectral imaging sensors capture spectral radiance values from N 0(N0= 432) channels
corresponding to wavelengths ranging from 400nm−2500nm. The complete hyperspectral image is
represented as x∈RH0×W0×N0where H0, W0are the height & width, respectively, and N0= 432
is the number of channels.
2.1 Technical Overview
As can be seen in 1, MMM composed of the following components: 1) Feature Selector block to
extract and selects salient features from the input hyperspectral image. 2) State-space Encoder to
encode the selected features via Mamba-S6 state-space block. 3) Hyperspectral decoder to decode
2the encoded feature map into segmentation mask and bounding boxes. Our Hyperspectral decoder
follows the same architecture as the previous work[ 10]. Due to space constraints, we will just give
overview to the Feature selector and the state-space encoder.
Feature selector The feature selector takes hyperspectral images as input. Since not all wavelengths
are relevant for methane detection, we selectively pass only the most useful channels for feature
extraction. The band-pass filter block achieves this by employing separate filters for the RGB (400nm-
700nm) and SWIR(2000nm-2500nm) channels. These filtered channels are then concatenated for
feature extraction by the backbone, which can be any standard feature extractor, such as ResNet [ 6].
Our spectral filter operates alongside the band-pass filter and the backbone. As input it takes the
full hyperspectral image. Utilizing a matched filter, it leverages the methane absorption pattern to
identify potential regions containing methane gas (see [ 10] for more details). This method has high
recall but poor precision, therefore, we will use it to select potential methane containing regions in
the hyperspectral images. Our masking block will use these identified regions to determine which
parts of the extracted features will be passed to the encoder block, discarding the rest. The amount of
discarding will be determined empirically.
State-Space Encoder The state-space encoder receives the selected features from the feature
extractor block. It adheres to a traditional encoder architecture [ 21] but replaces the attention
mechanism with the Mamba-S6 block. State-space models [ 4,5] are known for their computational
efficiency in sequence modeling. However, they typically lack context awareness due to fixed input
parameters. The recent GPU-aware Mamba-S6 block [ 3] addresses this limitation. We will integrate
this block into our state-space encoder. Additionally, a gated merging mechanism will be incorporated
to group nearby spatial locations in the features, further reducing the number of input sequences to
the Mamba-S6 block. The merging mechanism will have depth-wise and pixel-wise convolution
inspired from the recent work [22].
As mentioned earlier, Hyperspectral decoder will follow the traditional design [ 10]. It will utilize
feed-forward networks and de-convolution to predict bounding boxes and segmentation masks
respectively.
3 Exprimental Setup & Preliminary Analysis
We will use the MHS dataset [ 10] to train and test the model. We will evaluate the quality of our
model following the evaluation protocol of H-mrcnn[14].
Our initial implementation of the model has demonstrated a fourfold reduction in training memory
usage. As development progresses, we anticipate achieving even greater efficiency. Unlike existing
works [ 14,10], which primarily emphasize accuracy without considering computational costs, our
approach balances both. We build on the inherent efficiency of state-space models while enhancing it
with our environment-sensitive feature selector. This selector further reduces computational overhead,
allowing us to deliver a model that is not only highly accurate, but also computationally efficient.
4 Conclusion
In this proposal, we propose an end-to-end methane detection model, MMM. MMM has two unique
modules that leverage GPU-aware state-space model along with environment specific filter to detect
methane in an efficient manner. The successful implementation of MMM will pave the way for large-
scale deployment of real-time methane monitoring systems, enabling more effective and widespread
environmental monitoring.
References
[1]Philippe Ciais, Christopher Sabine, Govindasamy Bala, Laurent Bopp, Victor Brovkin, Josep Canadell,
Abha Chhabra, Ruth DeFries, James Galloway, Martin Heimann, et al. Carbon and other biogeochemical
cycles. In Climate change 2013: the physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , pages 465–570. Cambridge
University Press, 2014.
3[2]Christian Frankenberg, Andrew K Thorpe, David R Thompson, Glynn Hulley, Eric Adam Kort, Nick
Vance, Jakob Borchardt, Thomas Krings, Konstantin Gerilowski, Colm Sweeney, et al. Airborne methane
remote measurements reveal heavy-tail flux distribution in four corners region. Proceedings of the national
academy of sciences , 113(35):9734–9739, 2016.
[3]Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00752 , 2023.
[4]Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent memory with
optimal polynomial projections. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1474–1487, 2020.
[5]Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Ré. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured state
spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00396 , 2021.
[6]Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016.
[7] Paris IEA. Methane from oil & gas, 2020.
[8]California Institute of Technology Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Airborne visible infrared imaging spectrome-
ter - next generation (aviris-ng) overview, 2009.
[9]Stefanie Kirschke, Philippe Bousquet, Philippe Ciais, Marielle Saunois, Josep G Canadell, Edward J
Dlugokencky, Peter Bergamaschi, Daniel Bergmann, Donald R Blake, Lori Bruhwiler, et al. Three decades
of global methane sources and sinks. Nature geoscience , 6(10):813–823, 2013.
[10] Satish Kumar, Ivan Arevalo, ASM Iftekhar, and BS Manjunath. Methanemapper: Spectral absorption
aware hyperspectral transformer for methane detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17609–17618, 2023.
[11] Satish Kumar, ASM Iftekhar, Ekta Prashnani, and BS Manjunath. Locl: Learning object-attribute composi-
tion using localization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03780 , 2022.
[12] Satish Kumar, William Kingwill, Rozanne Mouton, Wojciech Adamczyk, Robert Huppertz, and Evan D
Sherwin. Guided transformer network for detecting methane emissions in sentinel-2 satellite imagery. In
NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning , 2022.
[13] Satish Kumar, Rui Kou, Henry Hill, Jake Lempges, Eric Qian, and Vikram Jayaram. In-situ water quality
monitoring in oil and gas operations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08800 , 2023.
[14] Satish Kumar, Carlos Torres, Oytun Ulutan, Alana Ayasse, Dar Roberts, and BS Manjunath. Deep remote
sensing methods for methane detection in overhead hyperspectral imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 1776–1785, 2020.
[15] Satish Kumar, Bowen Zhang, Chandrakanth Gudavalli, Connor Levenson, Lacey Hughey, Jared A Stabach,
Irene Amoke, Gordon Ojwang, Joseph Mukeka, Stephen Mwiu, et al. Wildlifemapper: Aerial image
analysis for multi-species detection and identification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 12594–12604, 2024.
[16] JOS Lelieveld, Paul J Crutzen, and Frank J Dentener. Changing concentration, lifetime and climate forcing
of atmospheric methane. Tellus B , 50(2):128–150, 1998.
[17] Gunnar Myhre, Drew Shindell, and Julia Pongratz. Anthropogenic and natural radiative forcing. 2014.
[18] Euan G Nisbet, Edward J Dlugokencky, and Philippe Bousquet. Methane on the rise—again. Science ,
343(6170):493–495, 2014.
[19] DR Thompson, I Leifer, H Bovensmann, M Eastwood, M Fladeland, C Frankenberg, K Gerilowski,
RO Green, S Kratwurst, T Krings, et al. Real-time remote detection and measurement for airborne imaging
spectroscopy: a case study with methane. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , 8(10):4383–4397, 2015.
[20] Andrew K Thorpe, Christian Frankenberg, David R Thompson, Riley M Duren, Andrew D Aubrey, Brian D
Bue, Robert O Green, Konstantin Gerilowski, Thomas Krings, Jakob Borchardt, et al. Airborne doas
retrievals of methane, carbon dioxide, and water vapor concentrations at high spatial resolution: application
to aviris-ng. Atmospheric Measurement Techniques , 10(10):3833–3850, 2017.
[21] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems ,
30, 2017.
[22] Jing Yao, Danfeng Hong, Chenyu Li, and Jocelyn Chanussot. Spectralmamba: Efficient mamba for
hyperspectral image classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08489 , 2024.
4