Meta-Learned Bayesian Optimization for Energy Yield
in Inertial Confinement Fusion
Vineet Gundecha1†, Ricardo Luna Gutierrez1†, Sahand Ghorbanpour1†, Rahman Ejaz2†,
Varchas Gopalaswamy2†, Riccardo Betti2†, Avisek Naug1, Paolo Faraboschi1,
Soumyendu Sarkar1†∗
1Hewlett Packard Enterprise,2University of Rochester
{vineet.gundecha, rluna, sahand.ghorbanpour, avisek.naug, paolo.faraboschi,
soumyendu.sarkar} @hpe.com
{reja, vgopalas, betti} @lle.rochester.edu
Abstract
With the growing demand for clean energy, fusion presents a promising path to sus-
tainable power generation. Inertial confinement fusion (ICF) experiments trigger
nuclear reactions by firing lasers at a fuel target, typically composed of deuterium
and tritium. These experiments are costly and require complex optimization of the
laser pulse shape across multiple shots to maximize energy yield. Even though
Bayesian Optimization (BO) has been commonly used to optimize such expensive
scientific experiments, vanilla BO methods do not leverage prior knowledge of
the function from simulations or past experiments and fail to achieve high sample
efficiency. In this work, we adapted and explored BO meta-learning techniques
for ICF that either meta-learn the BO surrogate model, the acquisition function, or
both from simulations. Our results demonstrate that the three meta-learning tech-
niques we investigated, Meta-Learning Acquisition Functions for BO (MetaBO),
Rank-Weighted Gaussian Process Ensemble (RGPE), and Neural Acquisition Pro-
cesses (NAP), drastically reduce the number of experiments needed to achieve a
satisfactory yield in ICF simulations.
Figure 1: Difference between Meta-BO and Classic BO approaches. Meta-BO methods leverage knowledge
collected from previous optimizations or simulations to increase optimization effectiveness.
1 Introduction
The global energy demand is rapidly raising, the International Energy Agency (IEA) projects that this
demand will double by 2050 (Eia, 2015). Currently, more than 80% of the world’s energy supply
comes from fossil fuels like petroleum, coal, and natural gas (Bahrami et al., 2019). Nuclear fusion
holds the promise for limitless, clean energy. Inertial confinement fusion (ICF) initiates nuclear fusion
by rapidly compressing fuel targets, typically composed of deuterium and tritium, using high-energy
∗Corresponding author. †These authors contributed equally.
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2024.lasers. ICF experiments are complex and exceptionally costly because of the extreme conditions
needed to achieve nuclear fusion. The high expenses and the limited number of ICF facilities lead to
very few opportunities for experimentation, often just a few times a year. So the development and
study of ICF optimization techniques that can utilize data in a sample-efficient manner is critical. To
our knowledge, this work is the first to study the application of meta-learning BO techniques in ICF,
augmenting BO from previous experiments or simulations. We specifically study three classes of BO
meta-learning techniques:
•MetaBO (V olpp et al., 2020) which meta-learns the acquisition function using Reinforcement
Learning (RL).
•Rank-Weighted Gaussian Process Ensemble (RGPE) (Feurer et al., 2022) which uses an
ensemble of Gaussian Processes as the surrogate model.
•Neural Acquisition Process (NAP) (Maraval et al., 2023) which simultaneously meta-learns
the surrogate model and the acquisition process in an end-to-end manner.
We show that meta-learning improves the performance of BO by increasing the effectiveness of the
optimization process in ICF.
Figure 2: NAP’s meta-learned surrogate predictions: (left) without any context points; (middle) after three
context points; (right) the optimization target function. NAP achieves rapid adaptation with high sample
efficiency, which is ideal for the limited ICF experiments possible on a shot day, given only a few shot days
occur annually. For clarity, two of the five dimensions are plotted here.
2 Background
2.1 ICF
Figure 3: An example laser pulse shape used
in ICF experiments. The shape is controlled
by 5 parameters. The parameters are adjusted
during an optimization campaign to maxi-
mize energy yield.ICF is a technique used to achieve nuclear fusion by sub-
jecting a tiny fuel pellet, usually made from a blend of
deuterium and tritium (hydrogen isotopes), to extremely
high temperatures and pressures. This is typically done
using high-powered lasers. The aim is to create the right
environment for the nuclei to overcome their natural re-
pulsion and fuse, releasing substantial energy (Betti and
Hurricane, 2016; Lees et al., 2021; Gopalaswamy et al.,
2019, 2024). The energy output for a given payload is in-
fluenced by the laser pulse, which delivers a massive burst
of energy within a short time (3 ns). The shape of this
pulse is controlled by 5 parameters, which are vital for ICF
optimization. An example of a pulse is shown in Figure 3.
Other related optimization studies include (Shmakov et al.,
2023; Gutierrez et al., 2024; Ghorbanpour et al., 2024).
ICF experiments are extremely expensive. They rely on
advanced, powerful laser systems due to the demanding
conditions necessary for achieving nuclear fusion. The high costs of the experiments and the
limited number of facilities equipped to perform ICF experiments lead to very infrequent experiment
opportunities, often limited to ten to twenty shots annually (five to ten per experimental campaign).
To accelerate ICF development, the exploration and study of sample-efficient techniques for ICF
optimization is crucial.
22.2 Bayesian Optmization
In BO, we sequentially maximize an expensive to evaluate black-box function f(x)for variables
x∈X, where Xis the input domain. BO techniques operate in two steps. First, based on previously
collected evaluation data, we fit a probabilistic surrogate model to emulate f(x)allowing us to make
probabilistic predictions of the function’s behavior on unobserved input points. Given the first step’s
probabilistic predictions, the second step in BO optimizes an AF that trades off exploration and
exploitation to find a new input query, xnew∈X, which is chosen for evaluation.
The goal in BO is to find the global optimum x∗as:
x∗=argmax
x∈Xf(x) (1)
2.3 Meta Bayesian Optimization
Meta-BO approaches aim to improve the optimization of new unseen target black-box functions by
leveraging knowledge from a set of Nrelated source tasks (functions) F(Maraval et al., 2023).
In Meta-BO, we assume that the model has access to this knowledge in the form of Ndatasets
D1, ....,DNcollected from evaluations in the set of Nsource tasks. Each dataset Dnconsist of en
evaluations of fn(x)∈ F for all n∈[1 :N], such as Dn={(xi
n, yi
n)}en
i=1, where yi
n=fn(xi
n).
These datasets are leveraged by the Meta-BO approaches to meta-learn a surrogate model, an AF, or
both. In applications such as ICF, the source task used for meta-learning can be built from simulations.
2.3.1 MetaBO
MetaBO (V olpp et al., 2020) uses RL to meta-learn an AF on source tasks that are drawn from the
same function class as the target task. It replaces the AF with a neural network that is able to identify
and exploit structural properties of a class of functions. Specifically it uses the Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) method as proposed in (Schulman et al., 2017) for training. A major drawback of
this technique is the use of a discrete grid when finding the maximum of the AF, intended to save on
training cost. We replace this with a continuous optimization algorithm during the evaluation phase.
2.3.2 RGPE
RGPE (Feurer et al., 2022) proposes a new method for Bayesian optimization by combining knowl-
edge from past optimization runs. RGPE ranks past optimization tasks according to their similarity to
the current task and creates a weighted combination of Gaussian process models, each trained on
these ranked tasks. This approach selectively transfers knowledge, focusing on the most relevant past
experiences and ultimately improving the accuracy and efficiency of the surrogate model.
2.3.3 Neural Acquisition Process (NAP)
While most Meta-BO techniques either meta-learn the surrogate or the AF, NAP provides state-of-
the-art performance by jointly learning both in an end-to-end manner using Transformer Neural
Processes (TNP) (Nguyen and Grover, 2023; Maraval et al., 2023), a class of models that combine
the flexibility and performance of transformers with the properties of stochastic processes. NAP is
trained using PPO in conjunction with an auxiliary supervised loss to build its AF.
3 Experiments
We evaluate the performance of different Meta-BO approaches, and compare against vanilla BO
approaches, in the task of energy yield optimization for ICF. For dataset creation, we utilized
the LOTUS library (Ejaz et al., 2024) to generate various laser pulse profiles based on a custom
parametrization. These parameters determine the laser power and timing, which were then used as
inputs for LILAC (Delettrez et al., 1987), a simulator for laser-driven fusion physics. The chosen
laser pulse shape significantly affects the experimental results (energy yield), influencing both the
compression of the fusion fuel and the development of hydrodynamic instabilities (Williams et al.,
2021). To develop a response surface reflecting different entropy shapes, we varied 5 parameters
3related to the laser pulse. Using Latin hypercube sampling, we generated 50,000 samples within the
design constraints of the laser system. These pulse shapes were tested with the LILAC simulator on a
fixed fusion fuel target, and the resulting neutron yields were analyzed to construct a response surface
based on these 5 parameters. Additionally, to create a diverse evaluation, we generated two source
tasks and one test task by modifying the simulator’s physics models, specifically, the equation of
state, which affects shock behavior in fusion fuel, thus changing the response surfaces across different
simulation versions. This divergence allows us to approximate the potential differences encountered
in sim-to-real scenarios for ICF experiments.
3.1 Meta-learning Performance
0 2 4 6 8 10
Steps0.00.20.40.60.81.0Normalized Regret
Regret Comparison between BO methods
RGPE
GP-EINAP
RandomGP-UCB
MetaBO
Figure 4: Comparison between classic BO methods and
Meta-BO methods in ICF. NAP is able to achieve op-
timal performance in few-samples. The shaded areas
represent a ±1standard error. Regrets are normalized.We compare the Meta-BO approaches with the
standard BO approach, which utilizes a GP sur-
rogate model combined with classical acquisi-
tion functions like UCB and EI (Garnett, 2023).
Additionally, we include Random Search as a
baseline. The performance of the approaches is
evaluated in terms of simple regret V olpp et al.
(2020); Maraval et al. (2023).To emulate a real-
world setting, we restrict the number of samples
in our experiments to 15. We run all experi-
ments using 5different seeds. The results of this
evaluation, shown in Figure 4, demonstrate the
comparative performance of the methods. The
meta-learning approaches such as RGPE and
NAP demonstrate superior performance com-
pared to the classic BO baselines, highlighting
the benefits of meta-learning in the ICF domain.
Notably, NAP exhibits exceptional performance
by reaching optima with only a few samples,
indicating its potential to accelerate progress in
ICF development.
3.2 NAP’s Surrogate Predictions
To understand the superior performance achieved by NAP, we examine the predictions made by its
surrogate model and assess how well it adapts. To conduct this evaluation, we compare the real
target function (test task) with NAP’s predictions in a 2D space. For NAP, we first evaluate its
initial predictions with zero context, so the surrogate information only comes from the meta-learning
pretraining (Context:0). Moreover, we assess how NAP adapts by querying it after three samples
have been collected from the target function (Context:3). The evaluation results in Figure 2 show
that NAP effectively uses information from source tasks to identify regions with a higher likelihood
of finding optimal solutions. Furthermore, after incorporating just a few samples, NAP accurately
adjusts its predictions to match the target function closely. NAP proposes larger adjustments at the
early stages, while at later stages it does some minor finetunning.
4 Conclusion and Future Work
We show that Meta-BO techniques can significantly improve the effectiveness of ICF simulations.
High sample efficiency can reduce the cost of experiments, accelerating the path to fusion energy
and contributing to a more sustainable planet. We plan to extend these techniques to multi-fidelity
Bayesian Optimization, incorporating data from higher-fidelity simulations and past experiments to
further improve optimization.
5 Acknowledgement
This work was financially supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Award No. DE-
SC0024408, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, and the University of Rochester.
4References
U. Eia, Annual energy outlook 2015 with projections to 2040, United States Energy Information
Administration, Washington (2015).
A. Bahrami, A. Teimourian, C. O. Okoye, H. Shiri, Technical and economic analysis of wind energy
potential in uzbekistan, Journal of cleaner production 223 (2019) 801–814.
M. V olpp, L. P. Fröhlich, K. Fischer, A. Doerr, S. Falkner, F. Hutter, C. Daniel, Meta-learning
acquisition functions for transfer learning in bayesian optimization, 2020. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1904.02642 .arXiv:1904.02642 .
M. Feurer, B. Letham, F. Hutter, E. Bakshy, Practical transfer learning for bayesian optimization,
2022. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.02219 .arXiv:1802.02219 .
A. Maraval, M. Zimmer, A. Grosnit, H. B. Ammar, End-to-end meta-bayesian optimisation with
transformer neural processes, 2023. arXiv:2305.15930 .
R. Betti, O. A. Hurricane, Inertial-confinement fusion with lasers, Nature Physics 12 (2016) 435–448.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys3736 . doi: 10.1038/nphys3736 .
A. Lees, R. Betti, J. P. Knauer, V . Gopalaswamy, D. Patel, K. M. Woo, K. S. Anderson, E. M.
Campbell, D. Cao, J. Carroll-Nellenback, R. Epstein, C. Forrest, V . N. Goncharov, D. R. Harding,
S. X. Hu, I. V . Igumenshchev, R. T. Janezic, O. M. Mannion, P. B. Radha, S. P. Regan, A. Shvydky,
R. C. Shah, W. T. Shmayda, C. Stoeckl, W. Theobald, C. Thomas, Experimentally inferred
fusion yield dependencies of omega inertial confinement fusion implosions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127
(2021) 105001. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.105001 .
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.105001 .
V . Gopalaswamy, R. Betti, J. P. Knauer, N. Luciani, D. Patel, K. M. Woo, A. Bose, I. V . Igumenshchev,
E. M. Campbell, K. S. Anderson, K. A. Bauer, M. J. Bonino, D. Cao, A. R. Christopherson, G. W.
Collins, T. J. B. Collins, J. R. Davies, J. A. Delettrez, D. H. Edgell, R. Epstein, C. J. Forrest, D. H.
Froula, V . Y . Glebov, V . N. Goncharov, D. R. Harding, S. X. Hu, D. W. Jacobs-Perkins, R. T.
Janezic, J. H. Kelly, O. M. Mannion, A. Maximov, F. J. Marshall, D. T. Michel, S. Miller, S. F. B.
Morse, J. Palastro, J. Peebles, P. B. Radha, S. P. Regan, S. Sampat, T. C. Sangster, A. B. Sefkow,
W. Seka, R. C. Shah, W. T. Shmyada, A. Shvydky, C. Stoeckl, A. A. Solodov, W. Theobald, J. D.
Zuegel, M. G. Johnson, R. D. Petrasso, C. K. Li, J. A. Frenje, Tripled yield in direct-drive laser
fusion through statistical modelling, Nature 565 (2019) 581–586.
V . Gopalaswamy, C. A. Williams, R. Betti, D. Patel, J. P. Knauer, A. Lees, D. Cao, E. M. Campbell,
P. Farmakis, R. Ejaz, K. S. Anderson, R. Epstein, J. Carroll-Nellenbeck, I. V . Igumenshchev, J. A.
Marozas, P. B. Radha, A. A. Solodov, C. A. Thomas, K. M. Woo, T. J. B. Collins, S. X. Hu,
W. Scullin, D. Turnbull, V . N. Goncharov, K. Churnetski, C. J. Forrest, V . Y . Glebov, P. V . Heuer,
H. McClow, R. C. Shah, C. Stoeckl, W. Theobald, D. H. Edgell, S. Ivancic, M. J. Rosenberg,
S. P. Regan, D. Bredesen, C. Fella, M. Koch, R. T. Janezic, M. J. Bonino, D. R. Harding, K. A.
Bauer, S. Sampat, L. J. Waxer, M. Labuzeta, S. F. B. Morse, M. Gatu-Johnson, R. D. Petrasso, J. A.
Frenje, J. Murray, B. Serrato, D. Guzman, C. Shuldberg, M. Farrell, C. Deeney, Demonstration of
a hydrodynamically equivalent burning plasma in direct-drive inertial confinement fusion, Nature
Physics 20 (2024) 751–757.
A. Shmakov, A. Naug, V . Gundecha, S. Ghorbanpour, R. L. Gutierrez, A. R. Babu, A. Guillen,
S. Sarkar, Rtdk-bo: High dimensional bayesian optimization with reinforced transformer deep
kernels, in: 2023 IEEE 19th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering
(CASE), IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–8.
R. L. Gutierrez, S. Ghorbanpour, V . Gundecha, R. Ejaz, V . Gopalaswamy, R. Betti, A. Naug,
D. Rengarajan, A. R. Babu, P. Faraboschi, S. Sarkar, Explainable meta bayesian optimization with
human feedback for scientific applications like fusion energy, in: NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning, 2024.
S. Ghorbanpour, R. L. Gutierrez, V . Gundecha, D. Rengarajan, A. R. Babu, S. Sarkar, Llm enhanced
bayesian optimization for scientific applications like fusion, in: NeurIPS Workshop on Machine
Learning and the Physical Sciences, 2024.
5J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, O. Klimov, Proximal policy optimization algorithms,
2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347 .arXiv:1707.06347 .
T. Nguyen, A. Grover, Transformer neural processes: Uncertainty-aware meta learning via sequence
modeling, 2023. arXiv:2207.04179 .
R. Ejaz, V . Gopalaswamy, A. Lees, C. Kanan, D. Cao, R. Betti, Deep learning-based predictive
models for laser direct drive at the omega laser facility, Physics of Plasmas 31 (2024). doi: 10.
1063/5.0195675 .
J. Delettrez, R. Epstein, M. C. Richardson, P. A. Jaanimagi, B. L. Henke, Effect of laser illumination
nonuniformity on the analysis of time-resolved x-ray measurements in uv spherical transport
experiments, Phys. Rev. A 36 (1987) 3926–3934. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevA.36.3926 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.36.3926 .
C. A. Williams, R. Betti, V . Gopalaswamy, A. Lees, High yields in direct-drive inertial confinement
fusion using thin-ice DT liner targets, Physics of Plasmas 28 (2021) 122708. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1063/5.0069372 . doi: 10.1063/5.0069372 .
R. Garnett, Bayesian Optimization, Cambridge University Press, 2023.
6