Measuring Impact of Climate Change on Tree
Species: analysis of JSDM on FIA data
Hyun Choi, Sergio Marconi, Ali Sadeghian, Ethan White, Daisy Zhe Wang
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL
{hchyun, asadeghian, daisyw}@ufl.edu ,{ethan, sergio.marconi}@weecology.org
Abstract
One of the ﬁrst beings affected by changes in the climate are trees, one of our most
vital resources. In this study tree species interaction and the response to climate
in different ecological environments is observed by applying a joint species distri-
bution model to different ecological domains in the United States. Joint species
distribution models are useful to learn inter-species relationships and species re-
sponse to the environment. The climates’ impact on the tree species is measured
through species abundance in an area. We compare the model’s performance across
all ecological domains and study the sensitivity of the climate variables. With the
prediction of abundances, tree species populations can be predicted in the future
and measure the impact of climate change on tree populations.
1 Introduction
Ecologist expect the rapid change in climate to have unprecedented impacts on species geographical
redistribution. Shifts in economically important species will likely have signiﬁcant impacts on human
well-being, forest management strategies and conservation planning [ 1,9,13]. Reliably predicting
future patterns in species distributions has become a major goal in ecology, and hence numerous
species distribution models have been developed [ 1,10,3]. Modern implementations use historical
climate data and a few topographic variables to predict individual species abundance, i.e. number of
individuals per targeted area [5].
Most of these algorithms are univariate approaches and focus on individual key species separately [ 10].
However, most species interact with others and their correlation can hold crucial information. This is
particularly true for rare species, whose records may be limited in number and borrowing strength
from co-occurring species may be fundamental to improve predictions and reduce their uncertainty
[5]. This has motivated the use of, Joint Species Distribution models (JSDM), a group of multivariate
approaches that generally use the partial correlation matrix among responses to estimate their
interactions [5].
Another key challenge in species distribution modeling is how to address the role of scale on
the ecological drivers controlling species distribution [ 6]. For example, both SDM and JSDM
are generally trained on continental datasets. The resulting models may fail when used to make
predictions for local areas, because the same environmental features may have different effects on
species abundance locally [ 8]. Understanding and integrating the scaling rules behind changes in
features effects will potentially unlock the opportunity to explicitly implement SDMs universally
applicable. Yet, to date we don’t even have a complete analysis of the role of scale on joint species
distribution modeling.
To address this limit, we studied the relationship of species distributions and species interactions
across multiple ecological domains and scales utilizing the generalized joint attribute model (GJAM)
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.[6]. GJAM is a cutting-edge and open source JSDM. Using GJAM for the purpose of this multi-scale
analysis has several advantages: (1) it is one of the few joint multilevel model of species abundance
available for ecologists, (2) it integrates partial correlations among species and estimates structure
among their interactions [ 14]; (3) changes in models coefﬁcients can easily be interpreted; (4) it
has been used extensively in the last few years, including for predicting tree species abundance at
continental scale.
By applying GJAM across different scales we ﬁnd that species have different interaction patterns and
sensitivity to environmental features and we ﬁnd similar results for different US ecological domains.
2 Methodology
In this section we will demonstrate a method of modeling tree species behaviours in different
environments. We use GJAM, a JSDM that is well suited for handling multifarious data [6].
LetYi2RSrepresent the abundances of Sunique species in the ithplots, and Xi2RQbe the
feature vectors consisting of the Qclimate variables corresponding to each plot, for 1in. We
model (for the sake of space and simplicity assume all features are continuous):
YiN(B>Xi;) (1)
WhereN(,)is the multivariate normal distribution, B2RQSsymbolizes the species response to
the climate variables, and 2RSSis a covariance matrix that resembles the species interaction
between each other. Given observations for XandY;GJAM estimates Bandusing equation (1),
we refer the reader to [ 6] for further details. With the distribution of species and climate variables the
model can predict the species response in a plot.
2.1 Modeling across Different Ecological Domains
GJAM has been previously used to learn continental joint species distribution of trees [ 6] using FIA.
In this study we further investigate how climate interacts with scale at different geographical regions
by applying GJAM to 20 independent ecological domains deﬁned by Neon [ 12]. We use Bto study
the climate variables’ impact on the species across different ecological domains by comparing it from
one domain to another and across scales. Similarly, can be used to study species interaction across
all domains. Also, having the climate variables the model can predict the species response for plots
with no samples or at another point in time.
The environmental predictors we used are slope, aspect (direction a tree faces due to the slope of
the land), elevation, average day length (March, April, October), precipitation (Summer months),
radiation (August), maximum temperature (August), and minimum temperature (January).
3 Preliminary Evaluation and Results
Data. For this study we used the Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA)1, an openly available inventory
of forests collected at a ﬁne grid nationwide [ 2]. Plots are distant from each other ( 5km), and cover
an area of 673 m2. Plots are sampled every 5 to 10 years depending on the State. We used tree
species identities from the latest census to have an estimate of the abundances for any target species,
at each plot, for current climate.
The climate data source, Daymet [ 15], contains daily information at a 1 1 (km) resolution for the
climate such as max and min temperature, radiation, and precipitation.
Ecologists divided the United States into different ecological regions for NEON. The NEON data [ 12]
has airborne remotely sense images and ground observations of NEON plots.
3.1 Experimental set up
To investigate JDSM across scales, we trained an independent model for each individual ecological re-
gion and the entire United States. Finally, we compared species-to-species and species-to-environment
correlations, for all those pairs of species co-occurring in different regions (n=262).
1FIA data available at https://apps.fs.usda.gov/fia/datamart/datamart.html .
2We created 20 separate response and predictor matrices for each of the domains by assigning each
FIA plot to its respective domain. To address sampling errors driven by small plot size, we group
neighbouring plots in clusters of 16 and treat them as contiguous 1ha plots using a same size
K-means clustering method based on the coordinates. With the clustered plots, we also aggregated
the response matrix to align each observation with the climate observations.
We randomly split 80/20 for train/test sets each of the domains. The evaluation metric for the model’s
prediction is the coefﬁcient of determination.
3.2 Assumptions
For this experiment, species that do not occur or sparsely occur are not predicted, which may inﬂate
the accuracy of the model. The reason for the exclusion of these species is due to the smaller impact
that these species may have on the overall region.
3.3 Preliminary results
We have obtain preliminary results for all domains, except Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and Tundra and
Taiga in Alaska domains due to the lack of FIA data in those regions.
Figure 1: Accuracy per domain, where accu-
racy is the percent of species where GJAM
performed better than the sample mean.
Figure 2: Sensitivity of predictors for Do-
main 3.
Figure 3: Covariance of Liriodendron
tulipifera and Acer Rubrum across North-
east (D1), Mid Atlantic (D2), Appalachi-
ans (D7), Ozarks Complex (D8).
Figure 2 displays that the day lengths are the most sensitive predictors for domain 3, this is true
across all domains. The high importance of day length can be explained through tree phenology,
as trees adapt their growing and reproduction cycles over time [ 4]. The variation of the impact with
other predictors in different domains can be explained by the adaptation to the unique climates, for
example elevation has higher impact in mountainous regions such as the Northern Rockies domain
compared to the ﬂatter Southeast domain. Species performance varies from domain to domain. The
reason for this is because a species may occur centrally in one domain while it occurs marginally in
another, the model generally performs better when a species occurs centrally.
We analyze the covariance of Liriodendron tulipifera and Acer Rubrum which overlap in 4 domains,
shown in Figure 3. The covariances in domains 2 and 7 are much higher than the other domains. The
change in covariances across domains can be seen in other species as well and this variance will be
tried to explained through ecological knowledge.
4 Conclusion and future work
We outline three publicly available data sources related to climate and tree species. We also apply a
straightforward model to predict the abundance of species that takes into account both climate and
inter species interactions. This prediction becomes more important with the drastic changes that
climate change could have on global ecosystems. Further spatio-temporal analysis of the join species
distribution model [ 7,11], to study species distribution shift under climate change over time becomes
more important with the drastic changes that climate change could have on global ecosystems. The
extension of this work in progress will be enhancing species classiﬁcation on NEON airborne remote
sensing images with information learned from JSDM models. Furthermore we work closely with
ecologist to both incorporate rules from domain knowledge in future models and to provide data
driven insight back.
3Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s Data-Driven Discovery
Initiative through grant GBMF4563 to E.P. White, by the National Science Foundation through grant
1926542 to E.P. White, S.A. Bohlman, A. Zaire, D.Z. Wang, and A. Singh, by the University of
Florida Informatics Institute (UFII) Graduate Fellowship to Sergio Marconi. We also thank Drs. Sarah
Graves, Ben Weinstein, Stephanie Bohlman, Alina Zare and Aditya Singh for helpful discussion
related to this research.
References
[1]M. B. Araújo and M. Luoto. The importance of biotic interactions for modelling species
distributions under climate change. Global Ecology and Biogeography , 16(6):743–753, 2007.
[2]W. A. Bechtold, P. L. Patterson, et al. The enhanced forest inventory and analysis program-
national sampling design and estimation procedures. Gen. Tech. Rep. SRS-80. Asheville, NC:
US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southern Research Station. 85 p. , 80, 2005.
[3]L. Boisvert-Marsh, C. Périé, and S. de Blois. Divergent responses to climate change and
disturbance drive recruitment patterns underlying latitudinal shifts of tree species. Journal of
Ecology , 2019.
[4]I. Chuine, J. Belmonte, and A. Mignot. A modelling analysis of the genetic variation of
phenology between tree populations. Journal of Ecology , 88(4):561–570, 2000.
[5]J. S. Clark, A. E. Gelfand, C. W. Woodall, and K. Zhu. More than the sum of the parts:
forest climate response from joint species distribution models. Ecological Applications , 24(5):
990–999, 2014.
[6]J. S. Clark, D. Nemergut, B. Seyednasrollah, P. J. Turner, and S. Zhang. Generalized joint
attribute modeling for biodiversity analysis: Median-zero, multivariate, multifarious data.
Ecological Monographs , 87(1):34–56, 2017.
[7]R. Fathony, A. Rezaei, M. A. Bashiri, X. Zhang, and B. Ziebart. Distributionally robust graphical
models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 8344–8355, 2018.
[8]A. E. Gelfand, S. Ghosh, J. S. Clark, et al. Scaling integral projection models for analyzing size
demography. Statistical Science , 28(4):641–658, 2013.
[9]S. Hsiang, R. Kopp, A. Jina, J. Rising, M. Delgado, S. Mohan, D. Rasmussen, R. Muir-Wood,
P. Wilson, M. Oppenheimer, et al. Estimating economic damage from climate change in the
united states. Science , 356(6345):1362–1369, 2017.
[10] L. R. Iverson, M. P. Peters, A. M. Prasad, and S. N. Matthews. Analysis of climate change
impacts on tree species of the eastern us: Results of distrib-ii modeling. Forests , 10(4):302,
2019.
[11] A. Mollalo, A. Sadeghian, G. D. Israel, P. Rashidi, A. Soﬁzadeh, and G. E. Glass. Machine
learning approaches in gis-based ecological modeling of the sand ﬂy phlebotomus papatasi,
a vector of zoonotic cutaneous leishmaniasis in golestan province, iran. Acta tropica , 188:
187–194, 2018.
[12] National Ecological Observatory Network. Data products: Neon domains shapeﬁle. http:
//data.neonscience.org , 2017. Provisional data downloaded on 19 Feb 2017. Battelle,
Boulder, CO, USA.
[13] D. Rolnick, P. L. Donti, L. H. Kaack, K. Kochanski, A. Lacoste, K. Sankaran, A. S. Ross,
N. Milojevic-Dupont, N. Jaques, A. Waldman-Brown, et al. Tackling climate change with
machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05433 , 2019.
[14] D. Taylor-Rodriguez, K. Kaufeld, E. M. Schliep, J. S. Clark, A. E. Gelfand, et al. Joint species
distribution modeling: dimension reduction using dirichlet processes. Bayesian Analysis , 12(4):
939–967, 2017.
4[15] M. M. Thornton, P. E. Thornton, Y . Wei, B. W. Mayer, R. B. Cook, and R. S. V ose. Daymet:
Monthly climate summaries on a 1-km grid for north america, version 3. ORNL DAAC, Oak
Ridge, Tennessee, USA. , 2017. URL https://doi.org/10.3334/ORNLDAAC/1345 .
5