Domain Adaptation for Sustainable Soil Management
using Causal and Contrastive Constraint Minimization
Somya SharmaaSwati Sharmab∗Rafael PadilhaaEmre Kicimanb
Ranveer Chandrab
*swatisharma@microsoft.com
a University of Minnesota Twin Cities, USA
b Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA
Abstract
Monitoring organic matter is pivotal for maintaining soil health and can help inform
sustainable soil management practices. While sensor-based soil information offers
higher-fidelity and reliable insights into organic matter changes, sampling and
measuring sensor data is cost-prohibitive. We propose a multi-modal, scalable
framework that can estimate organic matter from remote sensing data, a more
readily available data source while leveraging sparse soil information for improving
generalization. Using the sensor data, we preserve underlying causal relations
among sensor attributes and organic matter. Simultaneously we leverage inherent
structure in the data and train the model to discriminate among domains using
contrastive learning. This causal and contrastive constraint minimization ensures
improved generalization and adaptation to other domains. We also shed light on
the interpretability of the framework by identifying attributes that are important for
improving generalization. Identifying these key soil attributes that affect organic
matter will aid in efforts to standardize data collection efforts.
1 Introduction
Background Measuring and monitoring soil organic matter (OM) is pivotal in fighting against
climate change [6]. Apart from contributing to improving soil health, organic matter has several
co-benefits - such as fighting against soil erosion and preserving the water table [2, 5, 9]. These
characteristics make it imperative to preserve organic matter, especially in regions that are becoming
vulnerable to droughts and landslides as the climate changes. While monitoring OM is an important
problem, sampling and measuring OM (and other soil attributes) is expensive (e.g., the average cost
of soil testing in the US is $1444) [23]. Furthermore, to ensure accurate and reliable measurement of
soil properties, it is necessary to conduct sampling at intervals of every tens of meters [3].
Related Work Alternatively, insights about OM can be inferred from other soil characteristics and
remote sensing information using data-driven ML methods [8, 11, 22, 24, 13, 15, 4, 17, 19, 7, 20].
While sensor data input offers high-fidelity insights and captures the variability in the dominant soil
processes in the region, collecting data from sensors is expensive. On the other hand, remote sensing
data is inexpensive and widely available for different parts of the world. Notably, while remote
sensing data are underutilized in low-income regions, the benefits derived from use of remote sensing
will be the most in these regions where the effect of climate change is prominent[12]. However,
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: workshop at NeurIPS 2023.Figure 1: Domain Adaptation framework for Organic Matter Modeling using Causal and Contrastive Constraint
Minimization. Conditioning the satellite image embedding using soil attribute embeddings provides additional
context or guidance on how the underlying soil properties impact OM.
insights from remote sensing data may be biased due to noise and coarse-scale resolution [1, 10,
26]. In the context of OM mapping, domain adaptation has been useful in overcoming some of the
challenges due to remote sensing data and in adapting models to differing land types and countries
[16, 21]. While these studies use local soil information as input variables, which may be costly to
collect, the studies conclude that domain adaptation helps in improving the generalization to other
domains or regions.
Summary of Contributions We propose a scalable and generalizable domain adaptation framework
for mitigating bias from remote sensing data using sparse sensor data as auxiliary data. Even if
sensor data is not available during inference, leveraging sensor data while training can help capture
the variability in the underlying soil processes and improve the generalization of the framework.
Such a framework can be built on data-rich entities and be transferred to unobserved entities without
further fine-tuning. Conventional ML methods overlook the underlying causal structure in the data,
limiting their out-of-distribution generalization. To overcome this, we propose the use of causal
constraint minimization to ensure that the relation between the sensor data attributes and OM is
preserved in the posterior OM distribution across different regions. Traditional ML methods also
struggle with generalization to locations with unobserved drivers (no training data). We leverage the
spatial heterogeneity in the sensor attributes to improve generalization to out-of-distribution (OOD)
locations by influencing embeddings via contrastive learning. Our analysis is also able to identify key
soil attributes that affect organic matter, potentially improving understanding of how to optimize soil
management practices and standardize data collection approaches.
2 Methods
Thebackbone model is a CNN autoencoder (Fig. 7) that estimates OM from satellite imagery data
(more details in Appendix). Although this model uses satellite imagery input, which is more readily
available and captures information about changing soil properties, vegetation, and climate, leveraging
soil attributes can help distill the important signals from the images and improve the encodings
learned by the autoencoder framework. To achieve this, we propose incorporating two regularization
schemes - causal constraint minimization and contrastive learning.
Causally adaptive constraint minimization (CACM) has been implemented to improve generalization
under distributional shifts in computer vision benchmark datasets [18]. The method utilizes
different independence constraints based on how attributes in training data relate to response
variables. These constraints are incorporated in the loss function to regularize the training by
adaptively enforcing the correct independence constraints. We extend the causal constraint
minimization framework to a setting with continuous attributes and continuous response variable
on real-world dataset. We modify the framework to incorporate regularization loss terms that
2ensure that the encoding space follows the distributional properties that reflect the causal relations
among sensor attributes and OM instead of the output from the autoencoder. This helps ensure
that the output from the model is not being over-smoothed by the constraint minimization.
Following the CACM framework, our model also incorporates three types of causal relations -
confounded with OM, caused by OM, or independent of OM. For attributes that are independent
of OM, we enforceP|Aind|
i=1P
j>iMMD (P(ϕ(x)|ai,ind ), P(ϕ(x)|aj,ind )). For attributes that
are caused by OM, we enforceP|Acause|
i=1P
j>iMMD (P(ϕ(x)|ai,cause , y), P(ϕ(x)|aj,cause , y)).
For attributes that are confounded with OM via a confounding variable, we
enforce,P
∥E∥P|Aconf|
i=1P
j>iMMD (P(ϕ(x)|ai,conf ), P(ϕ(x)|aj,conf )). Here, ϕ(x)are
the encodings obtained from the satellite imagery CNN encoder. To compute the conditional
probabilities, for each attribute a, we categorize the samples by attribute value below and above the
mean attribute value. Here, Aind,Acause andAconf refer to the sets containing independent, causal
and confounded attributes, respectively. Adaptively choosing the regularization term depending on
the causal relation enables us to ensure that the independence constraints are also reflected in the
conditional embedding distribution.
We incorporate contrastive learning using another ANN autoencoder to learn representations for
the soil attributes. The embeddings of this ANN model are used to provide additional context on
how the underlying soil properties can impact the OM distribution. By incorporating contrastive
learning, we capture location-specific patterns while learning to discriminate between the variations
associated with different farming environments. We define positive and negative pairs based on
differing locations. Samples from the same location are expected to have similar characteristics,
including soil type, management practices, and environmental conditions, while different locations
are more likely to have dissimilar characteristics. We include triplet loss or contrastive loss during
training as LContrastive =D(za, zp)−D(za, zn). Here, za,zp, andznrefer to the embeddings from
the anchor domain, positive pair of the domain, and negative pair of the domain. Here, we use
Euclidean distance as our distance metric D. In each iteration, for each location, we randomly sample
positive and negative pairs to regularize the loss. Here, the positive pair refers to a sample from the
same location collected in a different year, and the negative pair refers to a sample from a different
location.
The Causal and Contrastive Constraint Minimization approach is shown in Fig. 2.
Figure 2: Domain Adaptation framework for Organic Matter Modeling using Causal and Contrastive Constraint
Minimization. The bi-level optimization scheme first enforces causal independence constraints and then modifies
the embeddings via contrastive learning.
3 Results
3Model Input Data Auxiliary
Training
DataMSE
Random Forest Satellite Data - 0.6351
Random Forest Satellite, Sensor - 0.2180
CNN Satellite - 0.3297
CNN Satellite, Sensor - 0.0814
CNN CACM Satellite Sensor 0.0578
CNN CACM + Contrastive Satellite Sensor 0.0513
CNN Contrastive Satellite Sensor 0.0657
(a)Out of Distribution GeneralizationFine-Tuning Env. CACM CACM+Contrastive Contrastive
- 0.3072 0.2354 0.1637
random 0.1998 0.1702 0.1153
closest 0.0688 0.0509 0.0923
farthest 0.1134 0.0977 0.1150
(b)Domain Adaptation using CNN backbone model
Table 1: Results on OOD generalization and Domain Adaptation
Data The satellite imagery data is obtained from Sentinel-2. The sensor data is obtained from
publicly available Genomes to Fields (G2F) dataset. The sensor data includes information about
soil attributes (soil texture, micronutrients, fertilizer application), management practices and also the
main variable of interest, OM. More details on included locations, datasets, and preprocessing are
given in the Appendix.
Generalization To test the OOD generalization of the framework, we train and test on different
locations. Table 1a presents results on OOD generalization results where the test set includes eastern
US locations ( Georgia and Delaware) while the train set includes locations from the western US.
The table compares models that use only satellite data as input with gold standard models that are
also able to use sensor data. While using sensor data as input improves generalization, sensor data
may be expensive to collect and use during model inference. Therefore, we propose leveraging
sensor data to improve embeddings in our model using causal constraint minimization. In such a
scenario, sensor data is only used while training the model as an auxiliary dataset that influences
encodings. We can further evaluate if we can leverage spatial heterogeneity among the different
domains to improve generalization. We leverage contrastive learning to learn encodings that enable
us to maximize the similarity between samples from the same location and maximize the dissimilarity
between samples from different locations. The results suggest that apart from leveraging contrastive
learning, successive implementation of causal and contrastive constraint minimization enables the
model to improve OM estimation.
Domain Adaptation To further test how the out-of-distribution generalization can benefit from
domain adaptation, we evaluate the model performance in K-fold cross-validation splits where K
is the number of different states. The value of K is 6 in these experiments. Table 1b reports how
model performance is impacted by fine-tuning the model in different locations relative to the test
environment. For each of the K states, we subset one state as fine-tuning location. This way (K-2)
locations are used for pertaining to the model, one location is used to fine-tune the model, and one
location is used to test in each of the folds. We report the average test MSE for each test split in
Table 2. The table shows that fine-tuning using constrain minimization is useful as opposed to not
using any fine-tuning data. This may suggest that fine-tuning on another domain allows the model to
escape any local minima that is achieved without fine-tuning. Among the three ways of choosing
the fine-tuning location, when the closest location is used for fine-tuning, the framework is able to
improve generalization. This may be because locations that are closely located may have similar
physical and soil farm attributes, improving the transfer of knowledge between domains. As opposed
to fine-tuning based on a randomly selected location, fine-tuning on the farthest location results in
improved performance. It has been shown that training on heterogeneous locations improves OOD
generalization [25]. Training on the farthest locations enables the model to learn to discriminate
among different locations. Since causal constraint minimization enables the framework to preserve the
underlying relation among the dominant soil processes, the improvement of farthest location-based
fine-tuning over random location and no fine-tuning is more evident.
Sensitivity Analysis In order to gain a better understanding of what variables are more impactful in
improving generalization as auxiliary variables, we measure variable importance by variable removal.
We leave one variable out at a time during training and evaluate how much test MSE increases due to
removal. Figure 3 reports the standardized test MSE gain when each of the soil attribute variables is
4Test Environment Delaware Georgia Germany Iowa Illinois Michigan
Fine Tune Environment Georgia Illinois Delaware Illinois Iowa Illinois Average
CNN CACM + Contrastive - 0.1843 0.1327 0.3265 0.6043 0.0716 0.0927 0.2354
CNN CACM + Contrastive FT 0.0235 0.0336 0.0131 0.1528 0.0418 0.0404 0.0509
CNN CACM - 0.0491 0.0406 0.3921 1.2433 0.0796 0.0382 0.3072
CNN CACM FT 0.0552 0.2127 0.0136 0.0715 0.0309 0.0289 0.0688
CNN Contrastive - 0.0195 0.0338 0.1049 0.7750 0.0380 0.0112 0.1637
CNN Contrastive FT 0.0195 0.0367 0.0162 0.1534 0.3171 0.0110 0.0923
Table 2: Domain Adaptation Model Performance on closest environment. FT: Fine-tuned
Figure 3: Standardized MSE Gain on Variable Removal
removed from the auxiliary training dataset. The higher the variable importance the more significant
the influence on changes in OM. For instance, clay soils tend to have a higher capacity to retain
moisture and nutrients, which in turn affects the decomposition of organic matter. Similarly, nitrate, a
form of nitrogen readily available to plants, influences plant growth and increases OM through crop
residues. This analysis helps shed light on which variables are important in improving out-of-sample
generalization as auxiliary variables. The collection of data on these attributes may help farmers draw
better insights about their farms. More results provided in the Appendix.
4 Discussion and Future Work
In this paper, we propose using a causal and contrastive constraint minimization mechanism to
improve the estimation of organic matter (OM) from remote sensing data. This framework enables
us to transfer knowledge from locations with soil information to locations where collecting this
information may be infeasible, improving scalability to other regions in the world where data
collection is cost-prohibitive. The sensitivity analysis may also help identify key soil characteristics
influencing OM. Farmers can use the information on important soil characteristics to make targeted
decisions on soil amendments. For example, if nitrogen levels are identified as crucial for organic
matter, farmers might adjust their fertilizer application strategies. Moreover, if soil characteristics
favoring organic matter are identified, farmers may consider reduced tillage practices to preserve soil
structure and organic matter content. These efforts can help optimize soil management practices to
allow more precision and efficient use of resources. There are several extensions to the study that can
be explored. For example, although our study accounts for changes due to soil characteristics, it is
also important to consider changes in OM due to weather dynamics. Two locations with similar soil
texture can have widely varying weather and climate. Due to the limited availability of reliable soil
attribute information, the use of more readily available weather data along with remote sensing data
will be an important future extension of this work.
References
[1] Sornkitja Boonprong et al. “The classification of noise-afflicted remotely sensed data using
three machine-learning techniques: effect of different levels and types of noise on accuracy”.
In:ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 7.7 (2018), p. 274.
[2] Per Schjønning et al. “Chapter Two - The Role of Soil Organic Matter for Maintaining Crop
Yields: Evidence for a Renewed Conceptual Basis”. In: ed. by Donald L. Sparks. V ol. 150.
Advances in Agronomy. Academic Press, 2018, pp. 35–79. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
51016/bs.agron.2018.03.001 .URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0065211318300245 .
[3] Zerina Kapetanovic et al. “FarmBeats: Improving Farm Productivity Using Data-Driven
Agriculture”. In: SIAM News (July 2019). https://sinews.siam.org/Details-Page/farmbeats-
improving-farm-productivity-using-data-driven-agriculture. URL:https://www.microsoft.
com/en-us/research/publication/farmbeats-improving-farm-productivity-
using-data-driven-agriculture/ .
[4] Hamza Keskin et al. “Digital mapping of soil carbon fractions with machine learning”. In:
Geoderma (2019). DOI:10.1016/j.geoderma.2018.12.037 .
[5] E. E. Oldfield, M. A. Bradford, and S. A. Wood. “Global meta-analysis of the relationship
between soil organic matter and crop yields”. In: SOIL 5.1 (2019), pp. 15–32. DOI:10.5194/
soil-5-15-2019 .URL:https://soil.copernicus.org/articles/5/15/2019/ .
[6] Nils Droste et al. “Soil carbon insures arable crop production against increasing adverse
weather due to climate change”. In: Environmental Research Letters 15.12 (2020), p. 124034.
[7] Mostafa Emadi et al. “Predicting and Mapping of Soil Organic Carbon Using Machine Learning
Algorithms in Northern Iran”. In: Remote Sensing (2020). DOI:10.3390/rs12142234 .
[8] Gerard B.M. Heuvelink et al. “Machine learning in space and time for modelling soil organic
carbon change”. In: European Journal of Soil Science (2020). DOI:10.1111/ejss.12998 .
[9] Rattan Lal. “Soil organic matter content and crop yield”. In: Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation 75.2 (2020), 27A–32A. ISSN : 0022-4561. DOI:10.2489/jswc.75.2.27A .
eprint: https://www.jswconline.org/content/75/2/27A.full.pdf .URL:https:
//www.jswconline.org/content/75/2/27A .
[10] Guo Yanan et al. “Cloud detection for satellite imagery using deep learning”. In: Journal of
physics: Conference series . V ol. 1617. 1. IOP Publishing. 2020, p. 012089.
[11] Thu Thuy Nguyen. “Predicting agricultural soil carbon using machine learning”. In: Nature
Reviews Earth & Environment (2021). DOI:10.1038/s43017-021-00243-y .
[12] Esther Rolf et al. “A generalizable and accessible approach to machine learning with global
satellite imagery”. In: Nature communications 12.1 (2021), p. 4392.
[13] Ali Sakhaee et al. “Performance of three machine learning algorithms for predicting soil
organic carbon in German agricultural soil”. In: null(2021). DOI:10.5194/soil-2021-107 .
[14] Mingmin Zhao, Peder A. Olsen, and Ranveer Chandra. “Seeing Through Clouds in Satellite
Images”. In: CoRR abs/2106.08408 (2021). arXiv: 2106.08408 .URL:https://arxiv.org/
abs/2106.08408 .
[15] Di An and Yangquan Chen. “A Soil Carbon Content Quantification Method Using A Minia-
ture Millimeter Wave Radar Sensor and Machine Learning”. In: IEEE/ASME International
Conference on Mechatronic and Embedded Systems and Applications (2022). DOI:10.1109/
mesa55290.2022.10004474 .
[16] Petar Bursa ´c, Miloš Kova ˇcevi´c, and Branislav Bajat. “Instance-based transfer learning for soil
organic carbon estimation”. In: Frontiers in Environmental Science 10 (2022), p. 1003918.
[17] Hassan Fathizad et al. “Spatiotemporal Assessment of Soil Organic Carbon Change
Using Machine-Learning in Arid Regions”. In: Agronomy (2022). DOI:10 . 3390 /
agronomy12030628 .
[18] Jivat Neet Kaur, Emre Kiciman, and Amit Sharma. “Modeling the data-generating process is
necessary for out-of-distribution generalization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07837 (2022).
[19] Xiangtian Meng et al. “An advanced soil organic carbon content prediction model via fused
temporal-spatial-spectral (TSS) information based on machine learning and deep learning
algorithms”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment (2022). DOI:10 . 1016 / j . rse . 2022 .
113166 .
[20] Ali Sakhaee et al. “Spatial prediction of organic carbon in German agricultural topsoil using
machine learning algorithms”. In: Soil(2022). DOI:10.5194/soil-8-587-2022 .
[21] Zefang Shen et al. “Deep transfer learning of global spectra for local soil carbon monitoring”.
In:ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 188 (2022), pp. 190–200.
[22] Zhi Tang et al. “Estimation of National Forest Aboveground Biomass from Multi-Source
Remotely Sensed Dataset with Machine Learning Algorithms in China”. In: Remote Sensing
(2022). DOI:10.3390/rs14215487 .
6[23] Katy Willis. “How much does it cost to test soil and what does it include?” en. In: Angi (Nov.
2022). URL:https://www.angi.com/articles/how- much- does- testing- soil-
cost.htm .
[24] Xianglin Zhang et al. “Digital Mapping of Soil Organic Carbon with Machine Learning in
Dryland of Northeast and North Plain China”. In: Remote Sensing (2022). DOI:10.3390/
rs14102504 .
[25] Jared D Willard et al. “Time Series Predictions in Unmonitored Sites: A Survey of Machine
Learning Techniques in Water Resources”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09766 (2023).
[26] Mingmin Zhao, Peder Olsen, and Ranveer Chandra. “Seeing through clouds in satellite images”.
In:IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing (2023).
7Appendix
Study Area
The sites included in the study are obtained from the publicly available Genomes to Fields (G2F)
dataset. The locations of the sites are given in the Table 3. For these sites, the data set provides
accurate and reliable soil attribute information. Modeling using these sites enables us to make accurate
predictions. The G2F data contains information from 59 environments (where an environment refers
to a location in a given year) over 6 locations. The pretrained encoder is pretrained using satellite
imagery from all 59 environments on multiple days in the year. For the results on domain adaptation
and generalization, the satellite imagery on the day of soil sampling is used as input to minimize
the bias in input data since the organic matter values are available on the days when the soil was
sampled in a given location in a year. Experiments on early predictions suggest that using satellite
imagery data from January 1stof each year instead of the day of sampling also provide reasonable
generalization. This enables to use the model even when we do not have information on when the
soil was sampled in the year.
deh gah iah ilh mih geh
Delaware Georgia Iowa Illinois Michigan Germany
Table 3: Site Names
Figure 4: Sites with Soil Attribute Information
Soil Atttributes Definition
While the complete information on data collection, variable definition for all variables included in
this study are given in Genomes to Fields (G2F) dataset, we define the variables that are predicted to
be important as auxiliary training variables.
Differences in Environments
We also show the differences in the environments using pairplot in the Figure 5. Note in particular
the difference in the OM distribution for Delaware and Germany in Fig. 6. In Table 1b, the results
show that the proposed approach learns better even when fine tuned with a location farthest from the
test location with distribution differences.
Satellite Imagery processing
We pre-process the raw Sentinel 2 imagery to remove clouds using the SpaceEye algorithm [14]. The
following bands are retained after pre-processing: B02, B03, B04, B05, B06, B07, B08, B8A, B11
8Variable Name Variable Definition
% Clay Percentage of clay composition in soil sample
Nitrate Available nitrate in parts per million (ppm)
Magnesium Available Magnesium in ppm
Calcium Available Calcium in ppn
Sodium Available sodium in ppm
CEC Cation Exchange Capacity (me/100g)
1:1 S Salts mm Soluble salts concentration in soil
Available N Amount of nitrogen in pounds per acre
% K Percentage of Potassium
% Na Percentage of Sodium
E Depth Soil sample collection depth
1:1 Soil pH Soil pH level in a mixture, by weight, one-part soil to one-part distilled H2O
% H Percentage of Hydrogen
Sulfate Available sulfate in ppm
% Mg Percentage of Magnesium
% silt Percentage of silt composition in soil sample
WDRF Buffer pH Woodruff method for measuring total soil acidity
% Ca Percentage of Calcium
Potassium Available Potassium in ppm
Table 4: Variable Definitions
and B12. For both the satellite imagery and soil attributes, we use min-max scaling to standardize the
data.
Model Overview
Backbone Model
The backbone model is a CNN autoencoder showed in the Fig. 7.
Causal and Contrastive Constraint Minimization
Causal Constraint Minimization
Following the work constraints enforced in CACM [18], the regularization constraints for attributes
that are independent, caused by OM and confounded with OM, respectively, are as follows,
|Aind|X
i=1X
j>iMMD (P(ϕ(x)|ai,ind ), P(ϕ(x)|aj,ind )) (1)
|Acause|X
i=1X
j>iMMD (P(ϕ(x)|ai,cause , y), P(ϕ(x)|aj,cause , y)) (2)
X
|E||Aconf|X
i=1X
j>iMMD (P(ϕ(x)|ai,conf ), P(ϕ(x)|aj,conf )) (3)
More details on how to leverage CACM can be found in the work Kaur et al. [18]. In our work, we
use the causal graph given in Figure 8 to identify which constraints to enforce.
Results on Pre-training the Encoder
Figure 9 shows the change in test MSE when the encoder is pretrained using more satellite data from
other time periods. Pretraining on a larger satellite dataset helps the encoder learn the underlying
physical patterns that are present in the remote sensing data.
9Figure 5: Pairplot showing relationships between different soil variables.
Figure 6: Distribution of OM for Delware (DEH) and Germany (GEH) locations.
Results on CACM versus Encoding-based CACM
In this study, we report the results in Fig. 5 using encoding-based CACM, which regularizes the
encoding space instead of the original variable space as was originally proposed. This reduces any
over-smoothing in the output space. This further allows the decoder to focus on train parameters that
only focus on OM estimation. We provide results on the domain adaptation experiments wherein we
finetune the model on the farthest environment.
10Figure 7: The backbone model is a CNN autoencoder. The input to the model is satellite imagery data and the
response is organic matter value.The encoder includes 3 sets of convolution layers stacked with ReLU activation
and max-pooling layers. The encoder maps the information to an array of encodings that are used as input to the
decoder, which includes fully connected layers.
Figure 8: Causal graph among the soil attributes. Several attributes in the data are both caused by Yand
confounded with Y. (a) The sub-figure shows a version of the causal graph where these nodes are treated as
confounded with Y. (b) The sub-figure shows a version of the causal graph where these nodes are treated as
caused by Y. The empirical generalization performance for the graph in sub-figure (a) is better.
Results on Sensitivity Analysis
Table 6 also provides a comparison of variable ranking obtained from this sensitivity analysis with
ranking for similar analysis when the soil attributes are used as input data.
These rankings are in agreement for several of the variables, such as percentage of clay (% Clay) in
soil, magnesium (ppm) in soil, and CEC. However, variables that have been known to significantly
impact organic matter content, such as nitrate, have a disagreement in ranking when used as auxiliary
variables and as input variables. This agreement may arise since the ranking derived based on
auxiliary variables also accounts for input data satellite imagery that takes care of other unobserved
variables whose impact we are unable to measure otherwise. The disagreement may also arise
because of a difference in the role of the variables during training - while the impact of the input
variable is directly mapped to response, the auxiliary variable in our framework is used indirectly to
influence the training process. Interestingly, some variables, like the percentage of potassium in the
soil, which are important in determining changes in organic matter, do not come out as important as
the input variable. This may be due to the effect of unobserved confounders or noise in data since the
correlation of this variable with OM is also relatively lower.
11Figure 9: Pretrained Encoder
Model MSE
CNN CACM 0.1134
CNN Original CACM 0.1308
Table 5: MSE comparison between original CACM and encoding based CACM.
Variable Importance as auxiliary variable Importance as input variable
% Clay 1 1
Nitrate 2 14
Magnesium 3 3
Calcium 4 10
CEC 6 4
% Potassium 9 27
Available Nitrogen 8 13
Table 6: Variable Ranking by Descending Importance
12