A Wildfire Vulnerability Index for Businesses Using 
Machine Learning Approaches  
 
 
Andrew Byrnes  
Dun & Bradstreet1 
byrnesa@dnb.com  
 
Lisa Stites  
Dun & Bradstreet1 
stitesl@dnb.com  
   
Abstract  
Climate change  and housing growth in ecologically vulnerable areas are 
increasing the frequency and intensity of wildfire events . These events  can have 
profound impact on communities and the economy , but  the financial and 
operational impacts of wildfire on business es have not been evaluated extensively  
yet. This paper presents a Wildfire Vulnerability Index  (WVI)  that measures the 
risk of a business failing in the 12 months following a wildfire event. An XGBoost 
algorithm champion model is compared  to two challenger models : 1) a model that 
extends the champion model  by incorporating building and property 
characteri stics and 2) a model  that utilizes a neural network approach . Results 
show  that while all models perform well  in predicting business failure risk post -
disaster event , the model that uses buildi ng and property characteristics performs 
best across all performance metrics . As the natural environment shifts under 
climate change and more businesses are exposed to the consequences of wildfire, 
the WVI  can help emergency managers allocate disaster aid to businesses at the 
highest risk of failing  and can also provide valuable risk insights for portfolio 
managers and loan processors .  
 
1 Introduction  
Wildfires are a growing problem as factors such as climate change and housing growth exacerbate  
the spread and impact of these events  [1]. Drought and persistent heat are creating warmer, drier 
conditions that lead to longer wildfire seasons  and climate change has been identified as a key driver 
in increasing wildfire conditions [2 , 3]. Additionally, housing growth in the wildland -urban 
interface, which is areas where housing meets or intermingles with wildland vegetation,  has 
increased the risk of human -caused wildfires and the risk of damage to structures due to housing 
locations  in areas that are at greater risk for wildfire exposure [4].  The negative consequences 
associated with wildfire events impact both communities and the econom y. Direct impacts include 
damage or loss of businesses  and homes, while indirect impacts can include reduced economic 
activity from decreases in physical economic activity (e.g ., foot traffic and tourism ) because of  
smoke compromising air quality  [1, 5, 6]. 
Although the re is an abundance of wildfire impact research with regards to residential housing, less 
work has been dedicated to understanding t he impact of wildfire on commercial businesses.  To 
 
 
 
1 Any opinions provided are the author's own personal opinions and are not necessarily the views 
of Dun & Bradstreet. The authors reserve the right to update the work.   
 
 2 understand the effect of wildfire on a business, the vulnerability of a business , in terms of its ability 
to survive in the months following a wildfire  event , should be evaluated. In this context, business 
survival can be defined as maintaining business -as-usual operations and remaining active in the 
months after a wildfire event, as opposed to going out of business or becoming commercially 
inactive . In essence this contributes to r esilience , which has been studied in the literature relating to 
community, economic , and business resilience  [7, 8 , 9]. Prior studies have also developed wildfire 
vulnerability indexes and modeling that are limited to building characteristics, landscape, a nd social 
vulnerability [ 10, 11, 12]. While some aspects of these previously developed indices  are useful  in 
predicting  business vulnerability, there exists a gap in extending wildfire vulnerability to businesses ’ 
operational status , influenced by financial health,  and their ability to recover from a natural disaster . 
This paper addresses the gap by presenting a Wildfire V ulnerability Index (WVI) that measures the 
risk of business failure , which is defined as going out of business or becoming inactive,  in the 
months that follow a wildfire event. The WVI  is based on the concept that a natural disaster event, 
such as wildfire , can negatively impact operating infrastructure or the ability to operate the company 
in a business -as-usual manner , which  can impact a company’s financial situation  and cause 
persistent  change in its operational status . These impacts on a subset of commerce can more broadly 
affect the business community and macroeconomic landscape because business relationships are 
complex , spanning geographies and crossing industries . As extreme weather events become more 
prevalent under climate change, i dentifying and quantifying t he linkage between operational status, 
business activity, and macroeconomic distress from natural disaster events is becoming increasingly 
important . Building upon a previously  developed champion model,  this research  tests both a new 
dataset in the model and a new modeling  approach . The baseline  champion model was developed 
using the extreme gradient (XGBoost) algorithm . Two challenger models  are introduced that  
incorporate data on building  characteristics  and utilize a Neural Network framework. The models 
are compared across multiple metrics  (e.g., AUC, Gini, KS, Capture Rate 10% ) to determine the 
best model for predicting business failure in the months following a wildfire event .  
2 Data and methods  
2.1 Data  
Data related to businesses and their financial performance was sourced from the Dun & Bradstreet  
(D&B) Data Cloud. D&B collects, curates, and validates business information from thousands of 
data sources on over 500 million global businesses . Constant  updates allow  businesses to be tracked  
over time  from incorporati on to bankruptcy or ceasing operations . Data sourced from D&B includes 
information such as business firmographics, business activity signals, trade history , financial 
statements, and D&B  risk scores. Thes e risk scores predict future risk behaviors ranging from 
financial stress to business growth . Historical wildfire perimeter shapefiles were collected from the 
National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC)  and historical temperature, wind, and precipitation data 
were sourced from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  (NOAA). Land cover 
data collected from the United States Geological Survey (USGS)  was also incorporated . Finally , 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) disaster assistance data and several factors from 
the FEMA  National Risk Index, such as expected annual losses from wildfire, social vulnerability, 
and community resilience  were included  (see appendix for more det ails on data sources) . 
For development of the challenger model  with new data,  property and building characteristic data 
were selected  that ultimately are sourced  from county property register offices . This data was 
sourced from the time period  April 2023 . Within this dataset are features including the number of 
building stories, construction materials, roofing material, construction year, and property type.  
2.2 Data  pre-processing and feature selection  
To identify businesses located near wildfire perimeters, geospatial joins were applied to match the 
latitude and longitude of the business address to wildfire perimeter polygon shapes represented in 
the NIFC shapefiles. The sample was limited to businesses located within 50 mile s of wildfire 
perimeters between the years 2015 to 2019. Approximately 1 million businesses that  were  active as 
of the wildfire event  and affected by historical wildfires were sampled . The observation period was 
one month prior to the start of a wildfire, with the performance period running from the month of  
 
 3 impact to 12 months later.  The target variable was defined as if the business entity  went out of 
business or became inactive in the 12 months following the wildfire event . The event rate at which 
businesses went inactive in the dataset was 10.44%. This sample was enriched with the dataset 
features  discussed in section 2.1 to create the analytical dataset.  
From the initial list of over two hundred  variables , the features  were re duced  using a  feature 
evaluation framework to calculate the overall information value (IV) of all attributes and identify 
features  that provided at least some value in predicting the target event in a univariate manner . 
Variable clustering was also used , which  selected only the top variables from each cluster – this 
further reduce d the number of features . The top features identified were then inclu ded in the final 
model. Additional preprocessing to the dataset  included one hot encoding to convert categori cal 
variables to a series of binary variables which is required by the XGBoost algorithm . Finally, for the 
XGBoost models, model segmentation was performed to create three different models based on 
whether the businesses had data on financials and trade  payments or not . This splits the dataset into 
roughly thirds. Segment 1 contained businesses with both financials and trade data, Segment 2 
contained business with trade data , but not financials data , and Segment 3 contained businesses with 
neither financial s nor trade data.  
For development of the neural network challe nger model , additional preprocessing was required to 
convert the variables to a common scale. For unbounded variables with large outliers , the log of the 
value  was used . Next,  all variables and the log -scaled variables we re scaled using the min max scaler  
technique to convert all variables to a 0 to 1 scale. Finally, for any missing or null  values , the values 
were imputed using either zero or the mean of the variable , depending  on the meaning of the 
variable.  
2.3 Proposed framework  
The resulting subset of potential predictor variables was input into an XGBoost  algorithm, a highly 
efficient, flexible, and optimized gradient boosting library that implements machine learning 
decision tree algorithms under a gradient boosting framework  [13].2 XGBoost was selected for its 
efficiency, ability to handle missing data,  and ability  to uncover complex nonlinear interactions 
between the features. A random search hyperparameter tuning technique was used to find the best 
specification of hyperparameters for the algorithm .3 
For the neural network challenger model , a sequential model was leveraged .4 This alternative  
methodology was selected for its ability to also uncover complex relationships between the variables 
and its ability to handle many predictors in the model. The model utilized two Dense layers  and two 
Dropout layers to mitigate any overfitting . A random search hypermeter tuning technique was used 
to select the learning  rate and number of neurons in each of the dense layers.   
2.4 Model evaluation  
To evaluate model  performance,  the analytic al dataset was split  into a train, validation, and test 
dataset using a 60% -20%-20% split , respectively. The  Gini, KS, AUC, and capture rate within the 
top 10% were employed to determine the best model.  
3 Results and discussion  
The champion model demonstrates  the ability to  predict the risk to a business following a wildfire  
event. Within the test data , this baseline model performs well with a  KS of 60.28 % and a capture 
rate in the top 10%  riskiest segment of 59.53%. This shows that this model performs well in risk 
ranking all businesses , as well as segmenting out the top riskiest businesses from the others  – 
 
 
 
2 Models were written in Python 3.7 with the following packages: scikit -learn  (0.24.2) , xgboost  (1.7.0 -dev), 
numpy  (1.26.0) , pandas  (2.1.1) , geopandas  (0.14.0) , tensorflow.keras (2.9.1)  and mlflow  (1.29.0) . 
3 The following parameters were tuned  to optimize performance of the model and minimize overfitting on the 
training dataset : column sample by level, column sample by tree, learning rate, max depth, minimum ch ild 
weight, number of estimators, and subsample . 
4 The Neural Network approach was developed using the tensorflow keras package.   
 
 4 important for disaster planning and mitigation .  
The first challenger model,  an XGBoost model with building data , was tuned on  10 iterations and 
the best model was selected based on the AUC of the validation  dataset  (see appendix for final 
parameters) . This model demonstrates  that it can also accurately predict the risk to a business 
following a wildfire event. The KS is higher than that of the champion model at 61.97% and a 
62.37% capture rate in the top 10% riskiest segment , showing that this model performs well within 
the out-of-time test data.  Additionally, this model  performs better than the champion model across 
all other performance metrics.  
After tuning the neural network sequential model,  the best model  was selected  based on the AUC of 
the validation dataset in accordance with reasonable results in the remaining validation metrics  (see 
appendix for final model summary) . After training for 50 epochs with early stopping , this challenger 
model also shows promise in  predicti ng busines s activity following a wildfire natural disaster  (with 
a 58.09 % KS and a capture rate in the top 10% riskiest segment of 55.96% ).  
Table 1: Summary of model performance on testing data set  
 
While the champion model  and two challenger models developed here all demonstrate predictive 
capabilities , the XGBoost  model with building data features  performs best on the testing dataset. 
Since a building’s structural resilience to wildfire can have impact on a busine ss’s capacity to 
continue business -as-usual operations post -disaster, the superior performance of this model is 
consistent in context .  
From the XGBoost model s, predictors that are important to predicting the opera tional health of 
businesses following a wildfire natural disaster  can be analyzed  by looking at the feature 
importances output by the model . Across all segments  of the XGBoost model with building data , a 
firm’s pre -disaster financial health is a top predictor of  the health of a business post -disaster. This 
makes  sense as  business es would expect to be financially stressed from a wildfire and those  already  
in dire financial straits would be expected to be pushed over the edge if a wildfire were to hit , while 
a business in financial strength and with excess reserves  might be able to absorb the impact. 
Additionally, building usage , which determines if a building is for residential or commercial 
purposes,  is a top predictor and in the top 6 predictors for 2 of the 3 model segments.   
4 Conclusion and future work 
As climate change is set to  increase the frequency of wildfire events around the globe , economic 
resiliency is key to sustaining global commerce and trade. Now more  than ever , the ability  to 
quantify and predict the risk  that the business landscape  faces f rom wildfires  can serve as a proactive 
capability in disaster risk management . Understanding potential business  risk and geographic or 
industry concentration can then help  devise and evaluate effective mitigation and adaptation efforts. 
By combining predictive modeling with natural disaster simulation, the business community  can 
understand  the trade -offs of possible future states and associated  actions .   
One large gap in the modeling approach es presented in this paper  is the lack of historical property 
and building data to match  the timeframe of the analytical data set. Based on the data available at the 
time of model development , the property and building data needed to be back populated  based on 
recent data . However,  buildings are frequently renovated, torn down, and rebuilt . With historical 
data, the models may be able to  better capture the impact of building characteristics  on busines s 
resilience to wildfire . Another future op portunity would be  to develop a solution for a short -term Metric  Champion Model  XGBoost + 
Building Data  Neural Network 
Approach  
AUC  87.49%  88.61%  86.21%  
Gini  74.97%  77.21%  72.43%  
KS 60.28%  61.97%  58.09%  
Capture Rate 10%  59.53%  62.37%  55.96%   
 
 5 impact model  that would  predict the operational status 30 days after wildfire impact and how long 
it would take for a business to turn the lights back on based on real -time signals. With a short -term 
model , supply chain disruptions in other regions  and targeting of businesses that need immediate 
relief assistance can be more accurately quan tified  to get the local economy back on the right track . 
Finally , future work can connect  this model  with real-time wildfire information to enable score 
updates  as new wildfires ignite and spread . This would allow stakeholders  to see the risk to the 
business landscape  change over time and make real -time decisions.   
References  
[1] Kramer, H. A., Mockrin , M. H., Alexandre, and P.M., Radeloff, V. C. “High Wildfire Damage in Interface 
Communities in California. ” International Journal of Wildland Fire , vol. 28, no. 9, 2019, pp. 641 -50. 
[2] National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) . “Wildfire climate connection”, 07/24/2023.  
[3] Westerling, A. L., et al. “Warming and Earlier Spring Increase Western U.S. Forest Wildfire Activity.” 
Science , vol. 313, no. 5789, 2006, pp. 940 -43. 
[4] Radeloff, V.C., Helmers, D.P., Kramer, H.A., Mockrin, M. H., Alexandre, P.M., Bar-Massada, A., Butsic, 
V., Hawbaker, T.J., Martinuzzi, S., Syphard, A.D.  et al. “Rapid Growth of the US Wildland -Urban Interface 
Raises Wildfire Risk.” PNAS , vol. 115, no. 13, 2018, pp. 3314 -19.  
[5] Molina, J.R., González -Cabán , A., and Rodríguez  y Silva , F. “Wildfires Impact on the Economic 
Susceptibility of Recreation Activities: Application in a Mediterranean Protected Area.” Journal of 
Environmental Management , vol. 245, 2019, pp. 454 -63. 
[6] Kochi, I., Donovan , G. H., Champ, P.A., and Loomis, J.B . “The Economic Cost of Adverse Health Effects 
from Wildfire -Smoke Exposure: A Review.” International Journal of Wildland Fire , vol. 19, no. 7, 2010, pp. 
803-17. 
[7] Cartier, E.A. and Taylor, L.L . “Living in a wildfire: The relationship between crisis management and 
community resilience in a tourism -based destination .” Tourism Management Perspectives , vol. 34, 2020, pp. 
1-12.  
[8] Rose, A . “Economic resilience to natural and man -made disasters: Multidisciplinary origins and contextual 
dimensions .” Environmental Hazards , vol. 7, no. 4,  2007, pp. 383 -98. 
[9] Hussen saad, M., Hagelaar, G., van der Velde , G., and Omta, S. W. F . “Conceptualization of SMEs’ 
business resilience: A systematic literature review .” Cogent Business & Management , vol. 8, no. 1, 2021, pp. 
1-33. 
[10] Papathoma -Köhle, M., Schlögl , M., Garlichs , C., Diakakis , M., Mavroulis, S., and Fuchs, S.  “A Wildfire  
Vulnerability Index for Buildings .” Scientific Reports , vol. 1 2, no. 6378 , 2022, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -
022-10479 -3. 
[11] Vaillant, N. M., Kolden, C. A., and Smith, A. M. S. “Assessing Landscape Vulnerability to Wildfire in 
the USA.” Current Forestry Reports , vol. 2, 2016, pp. 201 -13. 
[12] Wigtil, G ., Hammer , R. B., Kline , J. D., Mockrin, M. H., Stewart, S . I., Roper, D ., and Radeloff, V. C. 
“Places Where Wildfire Potential and Social Vulnerability Coincide in the Coterminous United States .” 
International Journal of Wildland Fire, vol. 25, 2016, pp. 896-908. 
[13] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system,” in Proceedings of the 22nd acm 
sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , 2016, pp. 785 –794. 
A Append ix 
A.1 Data sources  
 
Table 2: Data sources summary  
 
Data Source  Description  
D&B Data Cloud  Business information on 500 million + 
businesses globally that is collected, cleaned, 
and validated on an ongoing  basis. Data 
tracks businesses from creation to bankruptcy 
or ceasing operations. Data includes:   
 
 6 Business firmographics - number of 
employees, age of the business or industry . 
Business activity signals - how many times 
the business is searched for by other  
businesses . 
Trade history - how timely the business pays 
its bills. 
Financial statements - revenue, profit, loss, 
and other data typically found on 10 -k 
filings.  
Risk scores - predictive scores that measure 
the risk to a business or opportunity for 
growt h. 
National Interagency Fire Center  Data on the historical wildfires within the 
United States . This includes information on 
the date of the wildfire, the name, number of 
acres burned, and a geospatial polygon that 
represents where the wildfire occurred.  
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  Historical data on temperature, wind, and 
precipitation at a specific location.  
United State Geological Survey  Data that classifies a location as rural, urban, 
marshlands, forested, or many other land 
cover types.  
Federal Emergency Management Agency  Historical data on relief assistance  by natural 
disaster type. This includes whether certain 
programs for relief were approved and also 
measures of how much relief assistance 
dollars or loans were approved once a natural 
disaster declaration had been appro ved.  
National Risk Index data that classifies 
disaster risk in the United States at the 
county and census tract level. Factors 
include expected annual loss es, a measure 
of social vulnerability, and a measure of 
community resilience.  
Building and Propert y Data  Data on buildings and properties includ ing 
their location, usage type, detailed property 
type, number of stories, construction 
materials, roof materials, value, and acres.  
 
A.2 Model details  
Model segments are defined as follows:  
• Segment 1 contains businesses with both financials and trade data . 
• Segment 2 contains businesses with no financials data, but some trade data . 
• Segment 3 contains businesses with neither financials nor trade data . 
 
Table 3: XGBoost final parameters  
 
Parameters  Segment 1  Segment 2  Segment 3  
Column Sample 
by Sample  0.9 0.8 0.7  
 
 7 Column Sample 
by Tree  0.8 0.5 0.8 
Learning Rate  0.05  0.075  0.1 
Max Depth  4 5 5 
Min Child Weight  9 8 5 
Number of 
Estimators  400 600 400 
Sub Sample  0.6 0.8 0.9 
 
 
Table 4: Neural network model summary  
 
Layer (type)  Output Shape  Param #  
dense_3 (Dense)  (None, 79) 20,145  
dropout_2 (Dropout)  (None, 79)  0 
dense_4 (Dense)  (None, 15)  1,200  
dropout_3 (Dropout)  (None, 15)  0 
dense_5 (Dense)  (None, 1)  16 
Total params: 21,361    
Trainable params: 21,361    
Non-trainable params: 0    
   
 