OfﬁceLearn: An OpenAI Gym Environment for Reinforcement Learning on
Occupant-Level Building’s Energy Demand Response
Lucas Spangher1Akash Gokul1Joseph Palakapilly1Utkarsha Agwan1Manan Khattar1Wann-Jiun Ma2
Costas Spanos1
Abstract
Energy Demand Response (DR) will play a cru-
cial role in balancing renewable energy genera-
tion with demand as grids decarbonize. There
is growing interest in developing Reinforcement
Learning (RL) techniques to optimize DR pric-
ing, as pricing set by electric utilities often cannot
take behavioral irrationality into account. How-
ever, so far, attempts to standardize RL efforts in
this area do not exist. In this paper, we present
a ﬁrst of the kind OpenAI gym environment for
testing DR with occupant level building dynam-
ics. We demonstrate the ﬂexibility with which
a researcher can customize our simulated ofﬁce
environment through the explicit input parameters
we have provided. We hope that this work enables
future work in DR in buildings.
1. Introduction
Efforts to address climate change are impossible without a
quick and safe transition to renewable energy. Barring strate-
gies to address the “volatility” of generation in renewable
energy sources, grids with increasing shares of renewable
energy will face daunting consquences. These range from
wasting of energy through curtailment (i.e., the shutting off
of green energy sources when generation exceeds supply)
(Spangher et al., 2020), voltage instability, or damage to the
physical infrasture of the grid. Indeed, the California grid of
2019 needed to curtail roughly 3% of its energy, with some
days seeing up to 33% of solar energy curtailed.
One solution to curtailment commonly touted is energy
Demand Response (DR) which entails the deferment of
energy demand from when it is demanded to when it is most
opportune for it to be ﬁlled. DR is essentially costless, as
it requires no infrastructure, so it is important as a direct
solution.
One primary area of application for DR is in buildings.
Buildings make up a signiﬁcant, increasing component of
US energy demand. In residential and commercial buildings,
plug loads represent 30% of total electricity use ((Lanziseraet al., 2013), (Srinivasan et al., 2011)). In addition, the
quantity of energy used by plugs is increasing more quickly
than any other load type in both residential and commercial
buildings (Comstock & Jarzomski, 2012).
Machine Learning (ML), while transformative in many sec-
tors of the economy, is somewhat underdeveloped when it
comes to energy applications. The creation of the AI in
Climate Change community exist to bridge this gap, encour-
aging the collaboration of research to develop and apply
a broad array of techniques into an equally broad array of
applications. To encourage exploration in occupant level
building DR, we propose to formalize an OpenAI Gym en-
vironment for the testing of Reinforcement Learning (RL)
agents within a single ofﬁce building.
2. Related Works
Deep RL is a subﬁeld in ML that trains an agent to choose
actions that maximize its rewards in an environment (Sutton
& Barto, 1998). RL has had extensive success in complex
control environments like Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013)
and in previously unsolved domains like PSPACE-complete
Sokoban planning (Feng et al., 2020). It has limited success
in energy: Google implemented RL controls to reduce en-
ergy consumption in data centers by 40%. When DeepMind
used a form of multi-agent RL to beat the world champion
in the complex and strategic game of Go (Borowiec, 2016),
researchers called for similar advancement in RL for power
systems (Li & Du, 2018).
OpenAI Gym environments are a series of standardized
environments that provide platform for benchmarking the
progress of learning agents (Brockman et al., 2016). Gym
environments allow researcher to create custom environ-
ments under a general and widely accepted API frame-
work/format that immediately allows deployment of a suite
of out-of-the-box RL techniques; therefore therefore so
Gym environments tend to concentrate work around the
speciﬁc problem that they describe.
Other groups have produced OpenAI Gym environments
around similar goals but with different scopes. CityLearn
aims to integrate multi-agent RL applications for DR inOfﬁceLearn: An OpenAI Gym Environment for Building Level Energy Demand Response
connected communities (V ´azquez-Canteli et al., 2019). The
environment supports customizing an array of variables in
the creation of a heterogenous group of buildings, includ-
ing number of buildings, type of buildings, and demand
proﬁle. A competition was hosted in CityLearn, in which
the creators solicited submissions of agents that could learn
appropriately in their environment (Kathirgamanathan et al.,
2020).
We are unaware of an effort that attempts to focus study
around occupant level energy DR in a Gym environment:
that is, an effort that focuses on occupant level DR within a
building. Therefore, we endeavor in this work to present the
OfﬁceLearn Gym environment, an environment that may
serve as preparation grounds for experiments implementing
DR within real world test buildings.
2.1. Paper Outline
We have contextualized the creation of our Gym environ-
ment within the broader effort of applying ML techniques
to climate change in Sections 1 and 2. In Section 3, we
describe the technical details of our environment and how
those will differ in future iterations. In Section 4, we illus-
trate the dynamics of the system by comparing key design
choices in environmental setup. In Section 5, 6, and 7, we
conclude, note how you might use the environment, and
discuss future directions.
3. Description of Gym Environment
3.1. Overview
In this section, we highlight a summary of the environment
and the underlying Markov Decision Process. The ﬂow of
information is succinctly expressed in Figure 1.
The environment takes the format of the following Markov
Decision Process (MDP), (S;A;p;r ):
State SpaceS: The prices, energy usage, and baseline
energy, all 10-dim vectors.
Action Space A: A 10-dim vector (continuous or dis-
crete) containing the agent’s points.
Transition probability p.
Rewardrdeﬁned in Section 3.5.
We describe out design choices and variants of the MDP
below.
3.2. State space
The steps of the agent are currently formulated day by day,
with ten-hour working days considered. Therefore, while
Figure 1. A schematic showing the interplay between agent and
ofﬁce environment, and ensuing energy reponses. The agent re-
ceives prices from the grid, then transforms it into “points” (called
as such for differentiation.) Ofﬁce workers engage with the points
in the way an individual might be engaged with their home energy
bill, which is reasonable assuming behavioral incentives detailed
in (Spangher et al., 2020). The ofﬁce recieves these points at the
beginning of the “day”. Workers proceed to use energy throughout
the day and at night the system delivers a record of their energy
consumption, which is reduced into a reward that trains the agent.
the state space has several different components (described
below), each is of ten dimensions as each one is hourly in
nature.
3.2.1. G RID PRICE REGIMES
Utilities are increasingly moving towards time dependent
energy pricing, especially for bigger consumers such as
commercial ofﬁce buildings with the capacity to shift their
energy usage. Time of use (TOU) pricing involves is a
simple, two-level daily price curve that changes seasonally
and is declared ahead of time. We use PG&E’s TOU price
curves from 2019. Real time pricing (RTP), meanwhile, is
dynamic for every hour and changes according to supply
and demand in the energy market. We simulate it by sub-
tracting the solar energy from demand of a sample building.
There is signiﬁcant seasonal variation in prices depending
on geography, e.g. in warmer climates, the increased cool-
ing load during summer can cause an increase in energy
prices.
3.2.2. E NERGY OF THE PRIOR STEPS
The default instantiation of the environment includes the
energy use of ofﬁce workers of the prior step. This allows
the agent to directly consider a day-to-day time dependence.
The simulated ofﬁce workers in this version are currently
memoryless day to day in their energy consumption, but
a future simulation will allow for weekly deferable energy
demands to simulate weekly work that can be deferred and
then accomplished.
The energy of the prior steps may be optionally excluded
from the state space by those who use our environment.OfﬁceLearn: An OpenAI Gym Environment for Building Level Energy Demand Response
3.2.3. G RID PRICES OF THE PRIOR STEP
Users may optionally include the grid price from prior steps
in the state space. This would allow the agent to directly
consider the behavioral hysteresis that past grid prices may
have on a real ofﬁce worker’s energy consumption. Al-
though this is a noted phenomenon in human psychology
generally (Richards & Green, 2003), it is not well quanti-
ﬁed and so we have not included it in how we calculate our
simulated human agents.
3.2.4. B ASELINE ENERGY
Baseline Energy may optionally be included in the state
space. If the agent directly observes its own action and the
baseline energy, it observes all of the information neces-
sary to calculate certain simpler simulated ofﬁce worker
responses. Therefore, inclusion of this element will make
the problem fully observable, and truly an MDP rather than
Partially Observable MDP (POMDP).
3.3. Action space
The agent’s action space expresses the points that the agent
delivers to the ofﬁce. The action space is by default a con-
tinuous value between zero and ten, but may be optionally
discretized to integer values if the learning algorithm outputs
discrete values.
The purpose of the action is to translate the grid price into
one that optimizes for behavioral response to points. There-
fore, the policy will learn over time how people respond to
the points given and maximally shift their demand towards
the prices that the grid gives.
3.4. Ofﬁce workers: simulated response functions
In this section, we will summarize various simulated re-
sponses that ofﬁce workers may exhibit.
3.4.1. “D ETERMINISTIC OFFICE WORKER ”
We include three types of deterministic response, with the
option for the user to specify a mixed ofﬁce of all three.
In the linear response, we deﬁne simple ofﬁce worker who
decreases their energy consumption linearly below a base-
line with respect to points given. Therefore, if btis the
baseline energy consumption at time tandptare the points
given, the energy demand dat timetisdt=bt pt, clipped
atdminanddmax as deﬁned in Section 3.5.
In the sinusoidal response, we deﬁne an ofﬁce worker who
responds well to points towards the middle of the distribu-
tion and not well to prices at the. Therefore, the energy
demanddat timetisdt=bt sinpt, clipped atdminand
dmax.In the threshold exponential response, we deﬁne an ofﬁce
worker who does not respond to points until they are high,
at which point they respond exponentially. Therefore, the
energy demand disdt=bt (exppt(pt>5)), clipped
atdminanddmax.
3.4.2. “C URTAIL ANDSHIFT OFFICE WORKER ”
Ofﬁce workers need to consume electricity to do their work,
and may not be able to curtail their load below a minimum
threshold, e.g. the minimum power needed to run a PC.
They may have the ability to shift their load over a deﬁnite
time interval, e.g. choosing to charge their laptops ahead
of time or at a later time. We model a response function
that exhibits both of these behaviors. We can model the
aggregate load of a person ( bt) as a combination of ﬁxed
inﬂexible demand ( bfixed
t ), curtailable demand ( bcurtail
t ),
and shiftable demand ( bshift
t ), i.e.,bt=bfixed
t +bcurtail
t +
bshift
t . All of the curtailable demand is curtailed for the
Tcurtail hours (set to 3hours in practice) with the highest
points, and for every hour tthe shiftable demand is shifted
to the hour within [t Tshift;t+Tshift]with the lowest
energy price.
3.5. Reward
Speciﬁcation of the reward function is notoriously difﬁcult,
as it is generally hand-tailored and must reduce a rich and
often multi-dimensional environmental response into a sin-
gle metric. Although we include many possible rewards
in the code, we outline the two rewards that we feel most
accurately describe the environment. As we already demon-
strated in prior work the ability to reduce overall energy
consumption (Spangher et al., 2019), we endeavor to direct
this agent away from reducing consumption and towards
optimally shifting energy consumption to favorable times
of day.
3.5.1. S CALED COST DISTANCE
This reward is deﬁned as the difference between the day’s to-
tal cost of energy and the ideal cost of energy. The ideal cost
of energy is obtained using a simple convex optimization. If
~dare the actual demand of energy computed for the day, ~ gis
the vector of the grid prices for the day, Eis the total amount
of energy, and dmin;dmax are 5% and 95% values of en-
ergy observed over the past year, then the ideal demands are
calculated by optimizing the objective: d= min ddTgsub-
ject to the constraintsP10
t=0d=Eanddmin<d<d max.
Then, the reward becomes: R(d) =dTg dTg
dTg, i.e. taking
the difference and scaling by the total ideal cost to normalize
the outcome.OfﬁceLearn: An OpenAI Gym Environment for Building Level Energy Demand Response
3.5.2. L OGCOST REGULARIZED
Although the concept of the ideal cost is intuitive, the sim-
plicity of the convex optimizer means that the output en-
ergy is often an unrealistic, quasi step function. There-
fore, we propose an alternate reward of log cost regular-
ized. Following the notation from above, the reward is
R(d) = dTg (Pd<10(:5bmax)), wherebmax
refers to the max value from the baseline. In practice, we set
to some high value like 100. The purpose of the regular-
izer is to penalize the agent for driving down energy across
the domain, and instead encourage it to shift energy.
4. Illustration of Features
We will now demo the environment’s functioning. All com-
parisons are done with a vanilla Soft Actor Critic RL agent
that learns throughout 10000 steps (where one step is equal
to one day), with a TOU pricing regime ﬁxed at a single day.
The agent’s points are scaled between -1 and 1.
4.0.1. C OMPARISON OF REWARDS TYPE
We present the effect of using the Log Distance Regularized
and the Scaled Cost Distance. Please see Figure 2, in the
Appendix, for side by side comparison of the reward types.
In this ﬁgure, you can see that not only is the agent capable
of learning an action sequence that accomplishes a lower
cost than if the simulated ofﬁce workers were to respond
directly to the untransformed grid prices, but also differs in
how the learning is guided. The log cost regularized reward
accomplishes smoother prices that result in the agent defer-
ring most of the energy for the end of the day, whereas the
scaled cost distance reward allows for more energy earlier
in the day, guiding the simulated ofﬁce worker to increase
energy gradually throughout the day.
4.0.2. C OMPARISON OF OFFICE WORKER RESPONSE
FUNCTIONS
We present the effect of using different simulated ofﬁce
workers on the output of energy demand. Please see Figure
3, in the Appendix, for a comparison of two types of sim-
ulated ofﬁce workers. In the exponential response, we see
an example of how the ofﬁce worker’s energy demand re-
sponds to points – that is, perhaps, too coarsely for a learner
to make much difference. Meanwhile, the Curtail and Shift
response demonstrates a much richer response, which en-
ables a learner to learn the situation and perform better than
the control.
5. Conclusion
We present technical details of a novel gym environment for
the testing of RL for energy DR within a single building. Wedetail the design choices that we made while constructing
the environment. We then show demos of different reward
types and simulated ofﬁce responses.
6. Simulating DR in your building
The environment we provide contains many ways to cus-
tomize your own building. You may choose the number
of occupants, their response types, baseline energies, grid
price regimes, and frequency with which grid price regimes
change. You may also choose from a host of options when
it comes to customizing the agent and its state space. Please
contact us if you are interested in deeper customization and
would like a tutorial on the code.
7. Future Work
7.1. Variants of the MDP
We plan to offer the user the choice between a step size
that is a day’s length and a step size that is an hour’s length.
The alteration can provide a more efﬁcient state space repre-
sentation that provides for a fully observable MDP for the
agent, as well as a longer trajectory for action sequences
(i.e., ten steps for every trajectory to determine the ten hours
rather than a single step producing all ten hours), at which
RL tends to excel.
7.2. Reality Gap
Similar to existing simulations, e.g. Sim2Real (CITE
SIM2REAL), there is a gap between our environment and
reality. Future work in this direction will build more real-
istic response functions by relying on existing modelling
literature (CITE Planning Circuit from Fall’19).
7.3. OfﬁceLearn Competition
We plan to host a OfﬁceLearn competition in the future.
This competition will prioritize agents that can maximize
sample efﬁciency, due to the realistic time constraints of
a social game, and deferability of energy on a test set of
simulated ofﬁce workers.
8. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our wonderful and responsive peers
Peter Henderson and Andreea Bobu for their thoughtful ad-
vice and commentary on the environment. We would like to
also extend thanks to Alex Devonport, Adam Bouyamourn,
and Akaash Tawade for their help in earlier versions. We
would all, ﬁnally, like to thank our respective parents.OfﬁceLearn: An OpenAI Gym Environment for Building Level Energy Demand Response
References
Borowiec, S. Alphago seals 4-1 victory over go grandmaster
lee sedol. The Guardian , 15, 2016.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V ., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J.,
Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. Openai gym,
2016.
Comstock, O. and Jarzomski, K. Consumption and satu-
ration trends of residential miscellaneous end-use loads.
ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efﬁciency in Buildings,
Paciﬁc Grove, CA, USA , 2012.
Feng, D., Gomes, C. P., and Selman, B. Solving hard ai
planning instances using curriculum-driven deep rein-
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02689 ,
2020.
Kathirgamanathan, A., Twardowski, K., Mangina, E., and
Finn, D. A centralised soft actor critic deep reinforcement
learning approach to district demand side management
through citylearn, 2020.
Lanzisera, S., Dawson-Haggerty, S., Cheung, H. Y . I.,
Taneja, J., Culler, D., and Brown, R. Methods for de-
tailed energy data collection of miscellaneous and elec-
tronic loads in a commercial ofﬁce building. Building
and Environment , 65:170–177, 2013.
Li, F. and Du, Y . From alphago to power system ai: What
engineers can learn from solving the most complex board
game. IEEE Power and Energy Magazine , 16(2):76–84,
2018.
Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A.,
Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M. Playing
atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013.
Richards, T. J. and Green, G. P. Economic hysteresis in
variety selection. Journal of Agricultural and Applied
Economics , 35(1):1–14, 2003.
Spangher, L., Tawade, A., Devonport, A., and Spanos, C.
Engineering vs. ambient type visualizations: Quantify-
ing effects of different data visualizations on energy
consumption. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM Inter-
national Workshop on Urban Building Energy Sensing,
Controls, Big Data Analysis, and Visualization , Urb-
Sys’19, pp. 14–22, New York, NY , USA, 2019. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450370141.
doi: 10.1145/3363459.3363527. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3363459.3363527 .
Spangher, L., Gokul, A., Khattar, M., Palakapilly, J.,
Tawade, A., Bouyamourn, A., Devonport, A., and Spanos,
C. Prospective experiment for reinforcement learning ondemand response in a social game framework. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Applied
Machine Learning for Intelligent Energy Systems (AM-
LIES) 2020 , 2020.
Srinivasan, R. S., Lakshmanan, J., Santosa, E., and Srivastav,
D. Plug load densities for energy analysis: K-12 schools,.
Energy and Buildings , 43:3289 – 3294, 2011.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning i:
Introduction, 1998.
V´azquez-Canteli, J. R., K ¨ampf, J., Henze, G., and Nagy,
Z. Citylearn v1.0: An openai gym environment
for demand response with deep reinforcement learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM International
Conference on Systems for Energy-Efﬁcient Buildings,
Cities, and Transportation , BuildSys ’19, pp. 356–357,
New York, NY , USA, 2019. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery. ISBN 9781450370059. doi: 10.1145/
3360322.3360998. URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/3360322.3360998 .
9. AppendixOfﬁceLearn: An OpenAI Gym Environment for Building Level Energy Demand Response
Figure 2. A comparison of the Log Cost Regularized and the
Scaled Cost Distance rewards. The energy output of the simu-
lated ofﬁce workers is drawn in light blue, and corresponds to the
primary axes. The grid prices are drawn in red, and refers to TOU
pricing. It corresponds to the secondary axes. The agent’s actions
are drawn in dark blue, is scaled between -1 and 1 to improve
readability of the plots, and correspond to the secondary axes.
Figure 3. A comparison of the “Exponential Deterministic Ofﬁce
Worker” to the “Curtail and Shift Ofﬁce Worker”. The energy
output of the simulated ofﬁce workers is drawn in light blue, and
corresponds to the primary axes. The grid prices are drawn in red
and corresponds to the secondary axes. The agent’s actions are
drawn in dark blue, is scaled between -1 and 1, and correspond to
the secondary axes.