Multitask Learning for Estimating Power Plant
Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Satellite Imagery
Joëlle Hanna
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen
joelle.hanna@unisg.chMichael Mommert
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen
michael.mommert@unisg.ch
Linus Scheibenreif
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen
linus.scheibenreif@unisg.chDamian Borth
AIML Lab, School of Computer Science
University of St.Gallen
damian.borth@unisg.ch
Abstract
The burning of fossil fuels produces large amounts of carbon dioxide (CO 2), a
major Greenhouse Gas (GHG) and a main driver of Climate Change. Quantifying
GHG emissions is crucial for accurate predictions of climate effects and to enforce
emission trading schemes. The reporting of such emissions is only required in
some countries, resulting in insufﬁcient global coverage. In this work, we propose
an end-to-end method to predict power generation rates for fossil fuel power plants
from satellite images based on which we estimate GHG emission rates. We present
a multitask deep learning approach able to simultaneously predict: (i) the pixel-area
covered by plumes from a single satellite image of a power plant, (ii) the type
of ﬁred fuel, and (iii) the power generation rate. We then convert the predicted
power generation rate into estimates for the rate at which CO 2is being emitted.
Experimental results show that our model approach allows us to estimate the power
generation rate of a power plant to within 139 MW (MAE, for a mean sample power
plant capacity of 1177 MW) from a single satellite image and CO 2emission rates
to within 311 t/h. This multitask learning approach improves the power generation
estimation MAE by 39% compared to a baseline single-task network trained on the
same dataset.
1 Introduction
Despite a recent decrease in their use in most European countries, fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas,
still account for 71% of the continent’s energy production [Eurostat, 2021]. This popularity comes at
a dangerously high environmental cost that affects humanity in the long term: burning fossil fuels
leads to air and water pollution, and constitutes the main driver of climate change.
Quantifying GHG emissions from individual industrial sites typically requires the use of dedicated
measuring devices that report detailed emission information, as may be mandated by environmental
protection guidelines. Such data may be used to enforce environmental protection regulations or
pollutant certiﬁcate trading schemes. Unfortunately, reporting requirements differ between countries,
resulting in a highly heterogeneous coverage of GHG emission reportings, globally.
In this work, we aim to estimate GHG emission rates for fossil fuel power plants at a given time
through observations of the emitted plumes from Earth-observing satellites. GHG emission rates are
correlated to power generation rates and as such can be related to the extent of plumes emerging from
Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning workshop at NeurIPS 2021. Classification
HeadSemantic
Segmentation
Head
Regression Head
 Weather 
dataFeature Extractor
2237.8 MWCoal    : 0.12
Lignite: 0.83
Gas.    : 0.04
Peat.    : 0.01
2014.02  t/h CO2Figure 1: Diagram of the proposed multitask learning method. The model takes as input a multi-spectral
satellite image and learns simultaneously three tasks utilizing a U-Net backbone: (i) semantic segmentation of
plumes, (ii) classiﬁcation of type of ﬁred fuel, and (iii) regression with respect to power generation rate.
smokestacks or cooling towers of power plants. Our deﬁnition of plumes include plumes of steam
released from cooling towers, and, to a smaller scale, plumes of smoke released from smokestacks.
We propose a novel multi-task learning approach to primarily predict the power generation rate from
a satellite image of a power plant (treated as a regression problem), together with the type of ﬁred
fuel (treated as a classiﬁcation problem) and plume footprint (treated as a segmentation problem). We
incorporate external weather data to consider environmental conditions. Using the predicted power
generation rate, we can estimate the amount of emitted CO 2at a given time based on an empirical
relation. Both the predicted power generation rate and the CO 2emission rate predicted in this work
are of interest to various stakeholders and inform efforts to minimize the effects of Climate Change.
Our contribution is threefold: (1) we compile a data set of active power plants in Europe together with
their plume segmentation maps and the corresponding actual power generation rate, (2) we propose a
multitask learning approach able to simultaneously segment plumes, predict the type of ﬁred fuel as
well as the power generation rate – out-performing single-task approaches for all these tasks – and
(3) we estimate CO 2emission rates using the predicted power generation rates and derived emission
factors.
2 Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, little work has been done concerning the estimation of GHG emissions
from fossil fuel power plants based on observational data. The estimation of the power plant
generation has mostly been restricted to extracting statistics from available annual data. Yin et al.
[2020] estimate the deviation of each plant from the average generation of other similar plants
based on detailed information on plant-level (such as its size, fuel-type, or installed capacity) and
environmental factors using machine learning algorithms such as gradient boosting trees.
Gray et al. [2020] estimate the utilisation of fossil fuel power plants by identifying plumes in satellite
image data then counting the number of hours it is actually generating power over a year. Finally,
they compute the capacity factor by dividing the annual generation by an empirical relationship
between the annual mean plume area and mean hourly generation rate. Couture et al. [2020] showed
that it was possible to achieve high quality estimates of power plant behavior, i.e. whether it was on
or off, using satellite images. Going one step further, Mommert et al. [2020] successfully segment
smoke plumes over industrial sites and distinguish them from natural clouds and show that classifying
different types of power plants is possible with high conﬁdence [Mommert et al., 2021].
In contrast to previous works, we estimate the power generation rate (and from those CO 2emission
rate estimates) directly from satellite images without any prior assumptions, allowing our pipeline
to be applied on a global scale. We choose a multitask approach that has proven successful in other
remote sensing applications [Bischke et al., 2019].
3 Dataset
In this work, we use remote imaging data of fossil fuel power plants taken by ESA’s Sentinel-2
Earth-observing satellites. Extending the dataset from Mommert et al. [2020], we acquired geographic
2Table 1: Test set multitask vs. singletask baseline performance
for plume segmentation (seg.), power generation regression
(reg.) and fuel type classiﬁcation (cls.).
LossTask Weights ( i) Seg. Reg. Cls.
Seg. Reg. Cls. IoU MAE / R2accuracy
Seg. only 1 0 0 0.640 - -
Reg. only 0 1 0 - 225 / 0.66 -
Cls. only 0 0 1 - - 0.775
Reg. + Seg. 0.4 0.6 0 0.643 145 / 0.81 -
Reg. + Cls. 0 0.6 0.4 - 151 / 0.81 0.779
All tasks 0.15 0.7 0.15 0.668 139/0.83 0.853Table 2: Ablation study on impact of weather
variables on the regression task performance
on the test set and using the multitask model.
Temperature Humidity Wind MAE R2
7 7 7 169 0.74
3 7 7 148 0.77
7 3 7 142 0.81
7 7 3 147 0.79
7 3 3 145 0.81
3 3 3 139 0.83
coordinates of 300 European power plants based on the Joint Research Centre (JRC) Open Power
Plants Database [Kanellopoulos et al., 2019] for which power generation data [Entsoe, 2021] is
available. For each site we retrieved Sentinel-2 images taken during 2020 that we manually annotated.
Our ﬁnal dataset1contains 1639 satellite observations of 146 different fossil fuel power plants with
their segmentation label, that we carefully divide into train (80%) and test (20%) sets making sure
not to include the same site in more than one set. We supplement our processed satellite image data
with contemporaneous weather data (temperature, relative humidity and wind speed) from the ERA-5
data set [Hersbach et al., 2020]. The installed capacity of these power plants ranges from 29 MW to
5230 MW with a mean of 1177 MW. Our sample includes power plants that use 4 different types of
fuel: hard coal (41%), gas (29%), lignite (29%), and peat ( 1 %) .
For each observation, our dataset contains a Sentinel-2 satellite image with its segmentation map, the
type of ﬁred fuel, the actual power generation rate at the corresponding timestamp, and weather data.
4 Approach
Our approach consists of a multi-task deep learning model (see Figure 1) that takes as input a multi-
spectral satellite image centered on a power station to predict primarily its actual power generation
output. We added two other tasks: semantic segmentation of plumes and classiﬁcation of type of ﬁred
fuel, to boost the performance of the desired primary task. This is achieved by pushing the network
towards learning a robust representation that generalizes well to different related tasks.
Feature Extractor The ﬁrst part of the proposed method is a U-Net [Ronneberger et al., 2015] used
as a feature extractor. Its architecture consists of a contracting and an expanding path. We take
advantage of hard parameter sharing through the entire U-Net backbone leading to a representation
that is shared between all the tasks, reducing the risk of overﬁtting.
Speciﬁc Tasks The three tasks’ branches receive the shared representation and specialise on one task.
Theﬁrst task segments plumes. It consists of a convolutional layer which outputs a segmentation
map of the same height and width as the input image. The second task uses a convolutional layer
followed by a fully connected one and a softmax function to detect the type of ﬁred fuel: hard coal,
lignite, gas, or peat (see Section 3). Estimating actual power generation , the third and most important
task, is done using a convolutional layer followed by 3 blocks of batch normalization, fully connected
layer and ReLu for the activation function. Our targets for the regression task are power generation
rates reported through Entsoe [2021] that are contemporaneous with the Sentinel-2 observations and
available for each power plant in our sample.
Losses and Metrics We perform single task versus multitask training. Each of the three tasks is
learned using a speciﬁc loss function. For the plume segmentation we use the binary cross entropy
loss, for the fuel classiﬁcation task we use the cross entropy loss, and, for the regression task, we use
the L1 loss. In the multitask learning setup, we scale each loss and weight them ( i); weights were
optimized as hyper-parameters with a focus on the regression task. We measure the performance of
the segmentation task with IoU, fuel classiﬁcation task with accuracy, and the regression task with
Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and Mean Absolute Percentage Error
(MAPE)
1The code base for this work is available at github.com/HSG-AIML/RemoteSensingCO2Estimation; the
complete data set is available at zenodo.org
30 1000 2000 3000
Groundtruth Power Generation (MW)050010001500200025003000Prediction Power Generation (MW)MAERMSEIdentity
Trend LineFigure 2: Test set power generation rates.
0 1000 2000 3000
Groundtruth CO2 Emissions (t/h)05001000150020002500Prediction CO2 Emissions (t/h)
MAERMSEIdentity
Trend Line Figure 3: Test set CO 2emission rates.
CO 2Emission Estimation CO2emission rates are directly correlated to power generation rates and
depend on other plant-speciﬁc properties, like the fuel type. Based on reported annual emissions and
power generation for a selection of hard coal and lignite power plants [Gutmann et al., 2014], we
derive emission factors (0.9 0.1 t CO 2/MWh for lignite and 0.6 0.1 t CO 2/MWh for hard coal) to
convert our predicted power generation rates to CO 2emission rates. Figure 3 compares the predicted
and ground-truth emission rates for 65 observations of 6 different hard coal and lignite power plants
for which we know plant-speciﬁc emission factors [Gutmann et al., 2014]. Ground-truth emission
rates are derived for these 6 plants based on the plant-speciﬁc emission factors and their ground-truth
power generation rates.
5 Experimental Results
We perform a hyper-parameter search for the multitask architecture outlined in Section 4 and Figure 1,
leading to the optimized hyper-parameters and resulting in the evaluation metrics shown in Table 1.
In Figure 2 we display the predicted power generation rate versus the ground-truth for our test sample
based on the multi-task approach (”All tasks“ in Table 1), resulting in an R2of 0.83, an MAE of
139 MW, an RMSE of 261 MW and a MAPE of 19 %. CO 2emission rates are estimated from
predicted power generation rates utilizing fuel-speciﬁc emission factors (see Section 4 for 6 plants in
our test set for which such ground-truth information is available; the derived MAE for CO 2is 311 t/h
and the MAPE is 34 %.r We furthermore perform an ablation study with respect to weather variables
that supplement the regression task (Table 2).
6 Discussion
Our multitask approach enables us to predict power generation rates within 139 MW (MAE) and
estimate CO 2emission rates within 311 t/h (MAE) for our test set power plants. While the regression
performance is likely to improve with more training data, we found that the segmentation task
performance is already on-par with human labeling efforts. Based on Table 1 we note that the
multi-task model outperforms the single-task models trained on the same data: we observe a relative
improvement of 5% on the segmentation IoU, 39 % on the regression MAE, 26 % on the regression
R2, and 10% on the classiﬁcation accuracy.
We discuss some limitations of our approach. Our plume deﬁnition, on which the power generation
rate regression is based, does not distinguish between smoke plumes resulting from the combustion
of fossil fuels and steam plumes from cooling devices. The effect of this simpliﬁcation on our results
is negligible since we ﬁnd that most plumes in our data set emerge from cooling towers. Furthermore,
emission factors utilized in the conversion from power generation to CO 2emission are empirically
based on fuel-speciﬁc statistical considerations. While uncertainties introduced by this simpliﬁcation
are propagated into our CO 2emission rates, power plant-speciﬁc emission factors might lead to better
results, but are only available for select power plants.
47 Conclusion
This work shows that it is possible to predict power generation rates with high conﬁdence and CO 2
emission rates with some conﬁdence from single Sentinel-2 satellite images. Our proposed deep
multitask architecture was trained on a combination of three tasks and experiments conﬁrmed that
auxiliary tasks can indeed boost the network performance. Our model is able to predict power
generation rates from individual images with R2=0.83 or within 139 MW (MAE) and CO 2emission
rates within 311 t/h. For the average power plant in our sample (1177 MW capacity), our generation
predictions are of high conﬁdence. Our method is thus able to contribute to the estimation of CO 2
emission rates from power plants on a global scale.
8 Acknowledgment
This work utilizes satellite imagery provided by the European Copernicus Programme, power
generation data provided by ENTSO-E and weather data provided by ECMWF Integrated Forecasting
System. The authors would like to thank Entsorgung St. Gallen and Kehrichtheizkraftwerk St. Gallen
for their collaboration on this project.
References
B. Bischke, P. Helber, J. Folz, D. Borth, and A. Dengel. Multi-task learning for segmentation of
building footprints with deep neural networks. 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing (ICIP) , pages 1480–1484, 2019.
H. D. Couture, J. O’Connor, G. Mitchell, I. Söldner-Rembold, D. D’souza, K. Karra, K. Zhang,
A. R. Kargar, T. Kassel, B. Goldman, D. Tyrrell, W. Czerwinski, A. Talekar, and C. McCormick.
Towards tracking the emissions of every power plant on the planet. ArXiv , 2020. Tackling Climate
Change with Machine Learning Workshop at NeurIPS 2020.
Entsoe. Actual generation per generation unit table, 2021. https://transparency.entsoe.eu/
generation/r2/actualGenerationPerGenerationUnit/show .
Eurostat. Share of fossil fuels in gross available energy. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/fr/
web/products-eurostat-news/-/ddn-20210204-1 , 2021. (accessed: 2021-03-20).
M. Gray, L. Watson, S. Ljungwaldh, and E. Morris. Using satellite imagery to estimate the utilisation
of fossil fuel power plants, 2020. http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/
file/Statellite_report.pdf .
K. Gutmann, J. Huscher, D. Urbaniak, A. White, and C. Schaible. Europe’s dirty 30: How the eu’s
coal-ﬁred power plants are undermining its climate efforts. Published by CAN Europe, WWF
European Policy Ofﬁce, HEAL, the EEB and Climate Alliance Germany, in Brussels, Belgium;
http://awsassets.panda.org/downloads/dirty_30_report_finale.pdf , 2014.
H. Hersbach, B. Bell, P. Berrisford, G. Biavati, A. Horányi, M. S. J, J. Nicolas, C. Peubey, R. Radu,
I. Rozum, D. Schepers, A. Simmons, C. Soci, D. Dee, and J.-N. Thépaut. Era5 hourly data on
pressure levels from 1979 to present. copernicus climate change service (c3s) climate data store
(cds), 2020. 10.24381/cds.bd0915c6 .
K. Kanellopoulos, M. De Felice, I. Hidalgo Gonzalez, and A. Bocin. Jrc open power plants database
(jrc-ppdb-open), Dec. 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3574566 .
M. Mommert, M. Sigel, M. Neuhausler, L. Scheibenreif, and D. Borth. Characterization of industrial
smoke plumes from remote sensing data, 2020. Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
Workshop at NeurIPS 2020.
M. Mommert, L. Scheibenreif, J. Hanna, and D. Borth. Power plant classiﬁcation from remote
imaging with deep learning. ArXiv , abs/2107.10894, 2021.
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image
segmentation. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015 ,
May 2015.
5T. Yin, L. Byers, L. Valeri, and J. Friedrich. Estimating power plant generation in the global power
plant database. 2020.
6